@menu
* Renamed or deleted functions::
@end menu

This appendix is a partial list of  functions that have been removed 
from maxima.

@node Renamed or deleted functions, , Deleted Functions, Deleted Functions
@section Renamed or deleted functions

@deffn {関数} %ibes [@mvar{n}](@mvar{x}) 
The modified Bessel function of the first kind of order @mvar{n}.  
Use @code{bessel_i (@mvar{n}, @mvar{x})} instead.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} %j [@mvar{n}](@mvar{x}) 
The Bessel function of the first kind of order @mvar{n}.  
Use @code{bessel_j (@mvar{n}, @mvar{x})} instead.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} %k [@mvar{n}](@mvar{x}) 
The modified Bessel function of the second kind of order @mvar{n}.  
Use @code{bessel_k (@mvar{n}, @mvar{x})} instead.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} %y [@mvar{n}](@mvar{x}) 
The Bessel function of the second kind of order @mvar{n}.  
Use @code{bessel_y (@mvar{n}, @mvar{x})} instead.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} airy (@mvar{x})
The Airy function Ai(x) (A&S 10.4.2).
Use @code{airy_ai (@mvar{x})}.

@xref{Airy Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} bessel (@mvar{z}, @mvar{a}) 
The Bessel function of the first kind of order @mvar{a}.  
Use @code{bessel_j (@mvar{order}, @mvar{z})} instead.

Also set up an array BESSELARRAY is set up such that BESSELARRAY[I] =
J[I+A-ENTIER(A)](Z).

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn

@deffn {関数} expint (@mvar{z})
The Exponential Integral E1(z)(A&S 5.1.2).  
Use @code{expintegral_e1 (@mvar{z})}.

@xref{Exponential Integrals}.
@end deffn

@deffn {関数} g0 (@mvar{x}) 
The scaled modified Bessel function of the first kind of order 0.  Use @code{scaled_bessel_i0 (@mvar{x})}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} g1 (@mvar{x}) 
The scaled modified Bessel function of the first kind of order 1.  Use @code{scaled_bessel_i1 (@mvar{x})}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} gn (@mvar{x}, @mvar{n}) 
The scaled modified Bessel function of the first kind of order @mvar{n}.  
Use @code{scaled_bessel_i (@mvar{n}, @mvar{x})}.

In addition it set up an array GARRAY, analagous to JARRAY for @code{jn}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} gauss (@mvar{mean}, @mvar{sd})
The random floating point number from a normal
distribution with mean MEAN and standard deviation SD.
Use @code{random_normal (@mvar{mean}, @mvar{sd})}

@xref{distrib}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} i0 (@mvar{x}) 
The modified Bessel function of the first kind of order 0.  
Use @code{bessel_i (@mvar{0}, @mvar{x})}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} i1 (@mvar{x}) 
The modified Bessel function of the first kind of order 1.  
Use @code{bessel_i (@mvar{1}, @mvar{x})}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} in (@mvar{x}, @mvar{n}) 
The modified Bessel function of the first kind of order @mvar{n}.  
Use @code{bessel_i (@mvar{order}, @mvar{x})}.

In addition it set up an array IARRAY, analagous to JARRAY for @code{jn}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} j0 (@mvar{x}) 
The Bessel function of the first kind of order 0.  Use @code{bessel_j (@mvar{0}, @mvar{x})}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} j1 (@mvar{x}) 
The Bessel function of the first kind of order 1.  Use @code{bessel_j (@mvar{1}, @mvar{x})}.

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn


@deffn {関数} jn (@mvar{x}, @mvar{n}) 
The Bessel function of the first kind of order @mvar{n}.  Use @code{bessel_j (@mvar{order}, @mvar{x})}.

In addition it set up an
array JARRAY of N+1 elements, (numbered from 0 to ABS(N)) such that
JARRAY[I] gives the value of the I'th order Bessel function with
argument X. (If N < 0 then JARRAY[I] gives the (-I)'th Bessel
function).

@xref{Bessel Functions}.
@end deffn
