@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c File     : include-maxima.de.texi
@c License  : GNU General Public License (GPL)
@c Language : German
@c Author   : Dr. Dieter Kaiser
@c Date     : 15.10.2010
@c 
@c This file contains the contents, a detailed node listing and inclucdes
@c all files for the documentation.
@c 
@c This file is part of Maxima -- GPL CAS based on DOE-MACSYMA
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c -*-texinfo-*-

@c 2000-04-17 Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com> Added header,
@c info directory entry, reference to introduction chapter, and menu
@c descriptions.  Rearranged chapters.

@c to update the menus do: 
@c (texinfo-multiple-files-update "maxima.texi" t t)

@c texinfo-multiple-files-update will delete the detailed node listing!


@c %**start of header
@synindex vr fn
@settitle Maxima Manual
@c %**end of header
@setchapternewpage odd
@ifinfo
Das ist ein Texinfo Maxima Manual

Copyright 1994,2001 William F. Schelter

@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Maxima: (maxima).     Ein Computer Algebra System.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo 
@macro var {expr}
<\expr\>
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@include category-macros.de.texi

@titlepage
@sp 10
@center @titlefont{Maxima Manual}
@center Version 5.22
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

@c Maxima is a computer algebra system, implemented in Lisp.

@c Maxima is derived from the Macsyma system,
@c developed at MIT in the years 1968 through 1982 as part of Project MAC.
@c MIT turned over a copy of the Macsyma source code to the Department of Energy
@c in 1982; that version is now known as DOE Macsyma.
@c A copy of DOE Macsyma was maintained by Professor William F. Schelter
@c of the University of Texas from 1982 until his death in 2001.
@c In 1998, Schelter obtained permission from the Department of Energy
@c to release the DOE Macsyma source code under the GNU Public License,
@c and in 2000 he initiated the Maxima project at SourceForge to maintain
@c and develop DOE Macsyma, now called Maxima.

Maxima ist ein Computer Algebra System, das in Lisp programmiert ist.

Maxima basiert auf Macsyma, das am MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) 
in den Jahren 1968 bis 1982 als Teil des Projektes MAC entwickelt wurde. Das 
Department of Energy (DOE) erhielt im Jahr 1982 den Quellcode vom MIT; diese 
Version ist als DOE Macsyma bekannt. Professor William F. Schelter von der 
University of Texas hat von 1982 bis zu seinem Tod im Jahr 2001 eine Kopie 
von DOE Macsyma gepflegt. Im Jahr 1998 erhielt Schelter vom Department of Energy 
die Erlaubnis, den Quellcode von DOE Macsyma unter der GNU Public Lizenz zu 
ver@"offentlichen. Im Jahr 2000 initiierte Schelter das Maxima Projekt bei 
SourceForge, um DOE Macsyma, heute Maxima genannt, weiter zu entwickeln.
@end titlepage

@summarycontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Einf@"uhrung in Maxima, (dir), (dir)
@top

@c Maxima is a computer algebra system, implemented in Lisp.

@c Maxima is derived from the Macsyma system,
@c developed at MIT in the years 1968 through 1982 as part of Project MAC.
@c MIT turned over a copy of the Macsyma source code to the Department of Energy
@c in 1982; that version is now known as DOE Macsyma.
@c A copy of DOE Macsyma was maintained by Professor William F. Schelter
@c of the University of Texas from 1982 until his death in 2001.
@c In 1998, Schelter obtained permission from the Department of Energy
@c to release the DOE Macsyma source code under the GNU Public License,
@c and in 2000 he initiated the Maxima project at SourceForge to maintain
@c and develop DOE Macsyma, now called Maxima.

Maxima ist ein Computer Algebra System, das in Lisp programmiert ist.

Maxima basiert auf Macsyma, das am MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) 
in den Jahren 1968 bis 1982 als Teil des Projektes MAC entwickelt wurde. Das 
Department of Energy (DOE) erhielt im Jahr 1982 den Quellcode vom MIT; diese 
Version ist als DOE Macsyma bekannt. Professor William F. Schelter von der 
University of Texas hat von 1982 bis zu seinem Tod im Jahr 2001 eine Kopie 
von DOE Macsyma gepflegt. Im Jahr 1998 erhielt Schelter vom Department of Energy 
die Erlaubnis, den Quellcode von DOE Macsyma unter der GNU Public Lizenz zu 
ver@"offentlichen. Im Jahr 2000 initiierte Schelter das Maxima Projekt bei 
SourceForge, um DOE Macsyma, heute Maxima genannt, weiter zu entwickeln.
@end ifnottex

@c includes

@menu

@b{Maxima Grundlagen}

* Einf@"uhrung in Maxima::      Erste Beispiele mit Maxima.
* Programmfehler::              Programmfehler finden und berichten.
* Hilfe::                       Hilfe in einer Maxima-Sitzung erhalten.
* Kommandozeile::               Syntax der Kommandozeile.
* Datentypen::                  Ganze, rationale und Gleitkommazahlen, Konstante,
                                Zeichenketten, ...
* Ausdr@"ucke::                 Ausdr@"ucke in Maxima.
* Operatoren::                  Operatoren in Maxima.
* Auswertung::                  Auswertung von Ausdr@"ucken.
* Vereinfachung::               Vereinfachung von Ausdr@"ucken.
* Mathematische Funktionen::    Mathematische Funktionen in Maxima.
* Maximas Datenbank::           Deklarationen, Kontexte, Fakten, Eigenschaften.
* Grafische Darstellung::       2D and 3D grafische Ausgabe.
* Eingabe und Ausgabe::         Lesen und schreiben von Dateien mit Maxima.
@sp 1

Spezifische Gebiete der Mathematik

* Summen Produkte und Reihen::  Summen, Produkte, Tayolorreihen, Poisson Reihen.
* Analysis::                    Grenzwerte, Differentiation, Integration,
                                Differentialgleichungen.
* Polynome::                    Standard forms for polynomials, and
                                functions operating on them.

* Special Functions::           Special functions
* Elliptic Functions::          Elliptic Functions and Integrals
* Equations::                   Defining and solving equations.
* Numerical::                   Numerical integration, Fourier
                                transforms, etc.
* Arrays::                      Creating and working with arrays.
* Matrices and Linear Algebra:: Matrix operations.
* Affine::                      
* itensor::                     Indicial Tensor Manipulation.
* ctensor::                     Component Tensor Manipulation.
* atensor::                     Algebraic Tensor Manipulation.

* Number Theory::               Number theory.
* Symmetries::                  
* Groups::                      Abstract algebra.
@sp 1

Advanced facilities and programming

* Runtime Environment::         Customization of the Maxima environment.
* Miscellaneous Options::       Options with a global effect on Maxima.
* Rules and Patterns::          User defined pattern matching and
                                simplification rules.
* Lists::                       Manipulation of lists.
* Sets::                        Manipulation of sets.
* Function Definition::         Defining functions.
* Program Flow::                Defining Maxima programs.
* Debugging::                   Debugging Maxima programs.
@sp 1
 
Additional packages

* asympa::                      Asymptotic analysis package
* augmented_lagrangian::        augmented_lagrangian package.
* bode::                        Bode gain and phase plots.
* cobyla::                      Nonlinear optimization with inequality 
                                constraints.
* contrib_ode::                 Additional routines for ODEs
* descriptive::                 Descriptive statistics.
* diag::                        Jordan matrices.
* distrib::                     Probability distributions.
* draw::                        A Maxima-Gnuplot interface.
* dynamics::                    Graphics for dynamical systems and fractals.
* ezunits::                     Dimensional quantities.
* f90::                         Maxima to fortran translator.
* ggf::                         Generating function of sequences.
* graphs::                      Graph theory package.
* grobner::                     Functions for working with Groebner bases.
* impdiff::                     Implicit derivatives.
* interpol::                    Interpolation package.
* lapack::                      LAPACK functions for linear algebra.
* lbfgs::                       L-BFGS unconstrained minimization package.
* lindstedt::                   Lindstedt package.
* linearalgebra::               Functions for linear algebra.
* lsquares::                    Least squares.
* makeOrders::                  Polynomial utility.
* minpack::                     MINPACK functions for minimization and roots
* mnewton::                     Newton's method.
* numericalio::                 Reading and writing files.
* opsubst::                     Substitutions utility.
* orthopoly::                   Orthogonal polynomials.
* plotdf::                      Direction fields plots.
* romberg::                     Romberg method for numerical integration.
* simplex::                     Linear programming.
* simplification::              Simplification rules and functions.
* solve_rec::                   Linear recurrences.
* stats::                       Statistical inference package.
* stirling::                    Stirling formula.
* stringproc::                  String processing.
* unit::                        Units and dimensions package.
* zeilberger::                  Functions for hypergeometric summation.
@sp 1

Glossar

* Glossar::                     Erl@"auterung von Begriffen.
@sp 1

Index

* Index der Variablen und Funktionen:: Index.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 --- Ausf@"uhrliches Inhaltsverzeichnis ---

Einf@"uhrung
* Einf@"uhrung in Maxima::

Programmfehler
* Programmfehler::
* Einf@"uhrung in Programmfehler::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Programmfehler::

Hilfe
* Dokumentation::
* Funktionen und Variablen der Hilfe::

Kommandozeile
* Kommandozeile::
* Funktionen und Variablen der Eingabe::
* Funktionen und Variablen der Ausgabe::

Datentypen
* Datentypen::
* Einf@"uhrung in Maxima Zahlen::
* Zeichenketten::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Zahlen::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Zeichenketten::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Konstante::

Ausdr@"ucke
* Ausdr@"ucke::
* Einf@"uhrung in Ausdr@"ucke::
* Substantive und Verben::
* Bezeichner:: 
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Ausdr@"ucke::

Operatoren
* Arithmetische Operatoren::
* Relationale Operatoren::
* Logische Operatoren::
* Operatoren f@"ur Gleichungen::
* Zuweisungsoperatoren::
* Benutzerdefinierte Operatoren::

Auswertung
* Auswertung::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur die Auswertung::

Vereinfachung
* Vereinfachung::
* Einf@"uhrung in die Vereinfachung::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur die Vereinfachung::

Mathematische Funktionen
* Mathematische Funktionen::
* Funktionen f@"ur Zahlen::
* Funktionen f@"ur komplexe Zahlen::
* Funktionen der Kombinatorik::
* Algebraische Funktionen::
* Exponential- und Logarithmusfunktion::
* Winkelfunktionen::
* Einf@"uhrung in Winkelfunktionen::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Winkelfunktionen::
* Hyperbelfunktionen::
* Einf@"uhrung in Hyperbelfunktionen::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Hyperbelfunktionen::

Maximas Datenbank
* Einf@"uhrung in Maximas Datenbank::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Eigenschaften::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Fakten::

Grafische Darstellung
* Einf@"uhrung in die grafische Darstellung::
* Grafikformate::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur die grafische Darstellung::
* Grafikoptionen::
* Gnuplot Optionen::
* Gnuplot_pipes Formatfunktionen::

Eingabe und Ausgabe
* Kommentare::
* Dateien::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur die Eingabe und Ausgabe::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur die Tex-Ausgabe::

Summen, Produkte und Reihen
* Summen und Produkte::
* Einf@"uhrung in Reihen::
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Reihen::
* Poisson Reihen::

Analysis
* Funktionen und Variablen f@"ur Grenzwerte::
* Funktionen und Variablen der Differentiation::
* Integration::
* Differentialgleichungen::

Polynome
* Introduction to Polynomials::  
* Functions and Variables for Polynomials::  

Special Functions
* Introduction to Special Functions:: 
* Bessel Functions::
* Airy Functions::
* Gamma and factorial Functions::
* Exponential Integrals::
* Error Function::
* Struve Functions::
* Hypergeometric Functions::
* Parabolic Cylinder Functions::
* Functions and Variables for Special Functions::  

Elliptic Functions
* Introduction to Elliptic Functions and Integrals::
* Functions and Variables for Elliptic Functions::
* Functions and Variables for Elliptic Integrals::

Equations
* Functions and Variables for Equations::   

Numerical
* Introduction to fast Fourier transform::                     
* Functions and Variables for fast Fourier transform::
* Introduction to Fourier series::
* Functions and Variables for Fourier series::

Arrays
* Functions and Variables for Arrays::  

Matrices and Linear Algebra
* Introduction to Matrices and Linear Algebra::  
* Dot::                         
* Vectors::                     
* eigen::
* Functions and Variables for Matrices and Linear Algebra::  

Affine
* Introduction to Affine::
* Functions and Variables for Affine::      

itensor
* Introduction to itensor::      
* Functions and Variables for itensor::      

ctensor
* Introduction to ctensor::     
* Functions and Variables for ctensor::     

atensor
* Introduction to atensor::     
* Functions and Variables for atensor::     
  

Number Theory
* Functions and Variables for Number Theory::  

Symmetries
* Introduction to Symmetries::
* Functions and Variables for Symmetries::  

Groups
* Functions and Variables for Groups::      

Runtime Environment
* Introduction for Runtime Environment::  
* Interrupts::                  
* Functions and Variables for Runtime Environment::  

Miscellaneous Options
* Introduction to Miscellaneous Options::  
* Share::                       
* Functions and Variables for Miscellaneous Options::  

Rules and Patterns
* Introduction to Rules and Patterns::  
* Functions and Variables for Rules and Patterns::  

Lists
* Introduction to Lists::       
* Functions and Variables for Lists::       

Sets
* Introduction to Sets::       
* Functions and Variables for Sets::       

Function Definition
* Introduction to Function Definition:: 
* Function::                    
* Macros::                      
* Functions and Variables for Function Definition::
* Funktionen und Variable f@"ur die Funktionsanwendung::

Program Flow
* Lisp and Maxima::
* Introduction to Program Flow::  
* Functions and Variables for Program Flow::  

Debugging
* Functions and Variables for Debugging::   


asympa
* Introduction to asympa::
* Functions and variables for asympa::

augmented_lagrangian
* Functions and Variables for augmented_lagrangian::

bode
* Functions and Variables for bode::

cobyla
* Introduction to cobyla::
* Functions and Variables for cobyla::
* Examples for cobyla::

contrib_ode
* Introduction to contrib_ode::
* Functions and Variables for contrib_ode::
* Possible improvements to contrib_ode::
* Test cases for contrib_ode::
* References for contrib_ode::

descriptive
* Introduction to descriptive::
* Functions and Variables for data manipulation::
* Functions and Variables for descriptive statistics::
* Functions and Variables for specific multivariate descriptive statistics::
* Functions and Variables for statistical graphs::

diag
* Functions and Variables for diag::

distrib
* Introduction to distrib::
* Functions and Variables for continuous distributions::
* Functions and Variables for discrete distributions::

draw
* Introduction to draw::
* Functions and Variables for draw::
* Functions and Variables for pictures::
* Functions and Variables for worldmap::

dynamics
* Introduction to dynamics::
* Functions and Variables for dynamics::

ezunits
* Introduction to ezunits::
* Introduction to physical_constants::
* Functions and Variables for ezunits::

f90
* Functions and Variables for f90::

ggf
* Functions and Variables for ggf::

graphs
* Introduction to graphs::
* Functions and Variables for graphs::

grobner
* Introduction to grobner::
* Functions and Variables for grobner::

impdiff
* Functions and Variables for impdiff::

interpol
* Introduction to interpol::
* Functions and Variables for interpol::

lapack
* Introduction to lapack::
* Functions and Variables for lapack::

lbfgs
* Introduction to lbfgs::
* Functions and Variables for lbfgs::

lindstedt
* Functions and Variables for lindstedt::

linearalgebra
* Introduction to linearalgebra::
* Functions and Variables for linearalgebra::

lsquares
* Introduction to lsquares
* Functions and Variables for lsquares::

makeOrders
* Functions and Variables for makeOrders::

mnewton
* Introduction to mnewton::
* Functions and Variables for mnewton::

numericalio
* Introduction to numericalio::
* Functions and Variables for plain-text input and output::
* Functions and Variables for binary input and output::

opsubst
* Functions and Variables for opsubst::

orthopoly
* Introduction to orthogonal polynomials::
* Functions and Variables for orthogonal polynomials::

plotdf
* Introduction to plotdf::
* Functions and Variables for plotdf::

romberg
* Functions and Variables for romberg::

simplex
* Introduction to simplex::
* Functions and Variables for simplex::

simplification
* Introduction to simplification::
* Package absimp::
* Package facexp::
* Package functs::
* Package ineq::
* Package rducon::
* Package scifac::
* Package sqdnst::

solve_rec
* Introduction to solve_rec::
* Functions and Variables for solve_rec::

stats
* Introduction to stats::
* Functions and Variables for inference_result::
* Functions and Variables for stats::
* Functions and Variables for special distributions::

stirling
* Functions and Variables for stirling::

stringproc
* Introduction to string processing::
* Functions and Variables for input and output::
* Functions and Variables for characters::
* Functions and Variables for strings::

unit
* Introduction to Units::       
* Functions and Variables for Units::

zeilberger
* Introduction to zeilberger::
* Functions and Variables for zeilberger::

Glossar
* Glossar::

@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c  Put the @node lines here, rather than in the @included files,
@c  so emacs can automatically update them with C-c C-u C-e.
@c  nota bene: C-c C-u C-a and texinfo-multiple-files-update will delete
@c  the detailed node listing!

@node Einf@"uhrung in Maxima, Programmfehler, Top, Top
@chapter Einf@"uhrung in Maxima
@include Introduction.de.texi

@node Programmfehler, Hilfe, Einf@"uhrung in Maxima, Top
@chapter Programmfehler
@include Bugs.de.texi

@node Hilfe, Kommandozeile, Programmfehler, Top
@chapter Hilfe
@include Help.de.texi

@node Kommandozeile, Datentypen, Hilfe, Top
@chapter Kommandozeile
@include Command.de.texi

@node Datentypen, Ausdr@"ucke, Kommandozeile, Top
@chapter Datentypen
@include DataTypes.de.texi

@node Ausdr@"ucke, Operatoren, Datentypen, Top
@chapter Ausdr@"ucke
@include Expressions.de.texi

@node Operatoren, Auswertung, Ausdr@"ucke, Top
@chapter Operatoren
@include Operators.de.texi

@node Auswertung, Vereinfachung, Operatoren, Top
@chapter Auswertung
@include Evaluation.de.texi

@node Vereinfachung, Mathematische Funktionen, Auswertung, Top
@chapter Vereinfachung
@include Simplification.de.texi

@node Mathematische Funktionen, Maximas Datenbank, Vereinfachung, Top
@chapter Mathematische Funktionen
@include MathFunctions.de.texi

@node Maximas Datenbank, Grafische Darstellung, Mathematische Funktionen, Top
@chapter Maximas Datenbank
@include Database.de.texi

@node Grafische Darstellung, Eingabe und Ausgabe, Maximas Datenbank, Top
@chapter Grafische Darstellung
@include Plotting.de.texi

@node Eingabe und Ausgabe, Glossar, Grafische Darstellung, Top
@chapter Eingabe und Ausgabe
@include Input.de.texi

@node Summen Produkte und Reihen, Analysis, Eingabe und Ausgabe, Top
@chapter Summen, Produkte und Reihen
@include Series.de.texi

@node Analysis, Polynome, Summen Produkte und Reihen, Top
@chapter Analysis
@include Calculus.de.texi

@node Polynome, Glossar, Analysis, Top
@chapter Polynome
@include Polynomials.de.texi

@c @node Special Functions, Elliptic Functions, Trigonometric, Top
@c @chapter Special Functions
@c @include Special.texi

@c @node Elliptic Functions, Limits, Special Functions, Top
@c @chapter Elliptic Functions
@c @include Elliptic.texi

@c @node Equations, Differential Equations, Integration, Top
@c @chapter Equations
@c @include Equations.texi

@c @node Differential Equations, Numerical, Equations, Top
@c @chapter Differential Equations
@c @include Differential.texi

@c @include NonCommutative.texi

@c @node Numerical, Arrays, Differential Equations, Top
@c @chapter Numerical
@c @include Numerical.texi

@c @node Arrays, Matrices and Linear Algebra, Numerical, Top
@c @chapter Arrays
@c @include Arrays.texi

@c @node Matrices and Linear Algebra, Affine, Arrays, Top
@c @chapter Matrices and Linear Algebra
@c @include Matrices.texi

@c @node Affine, itensor, Matrices and Linear Algebra, Top
@c @chapter Affine
@c @include Affine.texi

@c @node itensor, ctensor, Affine, Top
@c @chapter itensor
@c @include Itensor.texi

@c @node ctensor, atensor, itensor, Top
@c @chapter ctensor
@c @include Ctensor.texi

@c @node atensor, Series, ctensor, Top
@c @chapter atensor
@c @include Atensor.texi

@c @node Number Theory, Symmetries, Series, Top
@c @chapter Number Theory
@c @include Number.texi

@c @node Symmetries, Groups, Number Theory, Top
@c @chapter Symmetries
@c @include Symmetries.texi

@c @node Groups, Runtime Environment, Symmetries, Top
@c @chapter Groups
@c @include Groups.texi

@c @node Runtime Environment, Miscellaneous Options, Groups, Top
@c @chapter Runtime Environment
@c @include Runtime.texi

@c @node Miscellaneous Options, Rules and Patterns, Runtime Environment, Top
@c @chapter Miscellaneous Options
@c @include Miscellaneous.texi

@c @node Rules and Patterns, Lists, Miscellaneous Options, Top
@c @chapter Rules and Patterns
@c @include Rules.texi

@c @node Lists, Sets, Rules and Patterns, Top
@c @chapter Lists
@c @include Lists.de.texi

@c @node Sets, Function Definition, Lists, Top
@c @chapter Sets
@c @include nset.texi

@c @node Function Definition, Program Flow, Sets, Top
@c @chapter Function Definition
@c @include Function.de.texi

@c @node Program Flow, Debugging, Function Definition, Top
@c @chapter Program Flow
@c @include Program.texi

@c @node Debugging, augmented_lagrangian, Program Flow, Top
@c @chapter Debugging
@c @include Debugging.texi

@c --- LOAD ADDITIONAL PACKAGES ------------------------------------------------

@c @node asympa, augmented_lagrangian, Analysis, Top
@c @chapter asympa
@c @include asympa.de.texi

@c @node augmented_lagrangian, bode, asympa, Top
@c @chapter augmented_lagrangian
@c @include augmented_lagrangian.de.texi

@c @node bode, cobyla, augmented_lagrangian, Top
@c @chapter bode
@c @include bode.de.texi

@c @node cobyla, contrib_ode, bode, Top
@c @chapter cobyla
@c @include cobyla.de.texi

@c @node contrib_ode, Package descriptive, bode, Top
@c @chapter contrib_ode
@c @include contrib_ode.de.texi

@c @node Package descriptive, diag, contrib_ode, Top
@c @chapter Package descriptive
@c @include descriptive.de.texi

@c @node diag, Package distrib, descriptive, Top
@c @chapter diag
@c @include diag.de.texi

@c @node Package distrib, draw, diag, Top
@c @chapter Package distrib
@c @include distrib.de.texi

@c @node draw, dynamics, distrib, Top
@c @chapter draw
@c @include draw.de.texi

@c @node dynamics, ezunits, draw, Top
@c @chapter dynamics
@c @include dynamics.de.texi

@c @node ezunits, f90, dynamics, Top
@c @chapter ezunits
@c @include ezunits.de.texi

@c @node f90, ggf, ezunits, Top
@c @chapter f90
@c @include f90.de.texi

@c @node ggf, graphs, f90, Top
@c @chapter ggf
@c @include ggf.de.texi

@c @node graphs, grobner, ggf, Top
@c @chapter graphs
@c @include graphs.de.texi

@c @node grobner, impdiff, graphs, Top
@c @chapter grobner
@c @include grobner.de.texi

@c @node impdiff, interpol, grobner, Top
@c @chapter impdiff
@c @include impdiff.de.texi

@c @node interpol, lapack, impdiff, Top
@c @chapter interpol
@c @include interpol.de.texi

@c @node lapack, lbfgs, interpol, Top
@c @chapter lapack
@c @include lapack.de.texi

@c @node lbfgs, lindstedt, lapack, Top
@c @chapter lbfgs
@c @include lbfgs.de.texi

@c @node lindstedt, linearalgebra, lbfgs, Top
@c @chapter lindstedt
@c @include lindstedt.de.texi

@c @node linearalgebra, lsquares, lindstedt, Top
@c @chapter linearalgebra
@c @include linearalgebra.de.texi

@c @node lsquares, makeOrders, linearalgebra, Top
@c @chapter lsquares
@c @include lsquares.de.texi

@c @node makeOrders, minpack, lsquares, Top
@c @chapter makeOrders
@c @include makeOrders.de.texi

@c @node minpack, mnewton, makeOrders, Top
@c @chapter minpack
@c @include minpack.de.texi

@c @node mnewton, numericalio, minpack, Top
@c @chapter mnewton
@c @include mnewton.de.texi

@c @node numericalio, opsubst, mnewton, Top
@c @chapter numericalio
@c @include numericalio.de.texi

@c @node opsubst, orthopoly, numericalio, Top
@c @chapter opsubst
@c @include opsubst.de.texi

@c @node orthopoly, plotdf, opsubst, Top
@c @chapter orthopoly
@c @include orthopoly.de.texi

@c @node plotdf, romberg, orthopoly, Top
@c @chapter plotdf
@c @include plotdf.de.texi

@c @node romberg, simplex, plotdf, Top
@c @chapter romberg
@c @include romberg.de.texi

@c @node simplex, simplification, romberg, Top
@c @chapter simplex
@c @include simplex.de.texi

@c @node simplification, solve_rec, simplex, Top
@c @chapter simplification
@c @include simplifications.de.texi

@c @node solve_rec, stats, simplification, Top
@c @chapter solve_rec
@c @include solve_rec.de.texi

@c @node stats, stirling, solve_rec, Top
@c @chapter stats
@c @include stats.de.texi

@c @node stirling, stringproc, stats, Top
@c @chapter stirling
@c @include stirling.de.texi

@c @node stringproc, unit, stirling, Top
@c @chapter stringproc
@c @include stringproc.de.texi

@c @node unit, zeilberger, stringproc, Top
@c @chapter unit
@c @include unit.de.texi

@c @node zeilberger, Glossar, unit, Top
@c @chapter zeilberger
@c @include zeilberger.de.texi

@node Glossar, Index der Variablen und Funktionen, Analysis, Top
@chapter Glossar
@include Glossary.de.texi

@node Index der Variablen und Funktionen, , Glossar, Top
@c @chapter Indizes
@include Indices.de.texi

@c end includes

