\input texinfo

@c Remove the empty page before a new chapter.
@setchapternewpage off

@setfilename kovacicODE.info
@settitle kovacicODE

@ifinfo 
@macro var {expr}
<\expr\>
@end macro
@end ifinfo


@dircategory Mathematics/Maxima
@direntry
* kovacicODE: (maxima/kovacicODE).           Maxima share package kovacicODE: Kovacic's method for differential equations.
@end direntry

@node Top, Introduction to kovacicODE, (dir), (dir)
@top
@menu
* Introduction to kovacicODE::
* Definitions for kovacicODE::
* Function and variable index::
@end menu
@chapter kovacicODE

@node Introduction to kovacicODE, Definitions for kovacicODE, Top, Top
@section Introduction to kovacicODE

@node Definitions for kovacicODE, Function and variable index, Introduction to kovacicODE, Top
@section Definitions for kovacicODE

@deffn {Function} kovacicODE (@var{expr}, @var{y}, @var{x})

@code{kovacicODE} is an implementation of the Kovacic algorithm for
finding the solution of second order linear ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) with Liouvillian solutions.
If the ODE has a Liouvillian solution,
@code{kovacicODE} finds and returns the solution.
If the ODE does not have a Liouvillian solution, @code{kovacicODE} returns @code{false}.

@code{load("kovacicODE")} loads this function.

Example:

Example 1 from "On Liouvillian Solutions of Linear Differential Equations" by F. Unger (1992),
@i{Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and Computing}, volume 2, issue 3, pp 171--193.
@code{DEBUGFLAG} controls debugging output in @code{kovacicODE};
we'll set it to 0 to suppress debugging output in this example.

@c ===beg===
@c load (kovacicODE) $
@c eq : 'diff(y, x, 2) - 'diff(y, x, 1)/x + x^2*y/(x^4 + 2*x^2 + 1) = 0;
@c DEBUGFLAG : 0 $
@c kovacicODE (eq, y, x);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) load (kovacicODE) $
(%i2) eq : 'diff(y,x,2) - 'diff(y,x,1)/x+x^2*y/(x^4+2*x^2+1) = 0;
                        dy
                   2    --        2
                  d y   dx       x  y
(%o2)             --- - -- + ------------- = 0
                    2   x     4      2
                  dx         x  + 2 x  + 1
(%i3) DEBUGFLAG : 0 $
(%i4) kovacicODE (eq, y, x);
                     2           2                  2
(%o4) [y = %k2 sqrt(x  + 1) log(x  + 1) + %k1 sqrt(x  + 1)]
@end example
@c Removed some spaces in (%i2) in the example above, so that PDF output is okay, otherwise the line is too long.

@end deffn

@node Function and variable index,  , Definitions for kovacicODE, Top
@appendix Function and variable index
@printindex fn
@c @printindex vr

@bye
