@anchor{command_line_options}
The following command line options are available for Maxima:

@need 100
@table @code
@need 150
@item     -b <file>, --batch=<file>
        Process maxima file <file> in batch mode.


@need 150
@item     --batch-lisp=<file>
        Process lisp file <file> in batch mode.


@need 150
@item     --batch-string=<string>
        Process maxima command(s) <string> in batch mode.


@need 150
@item     -d, --directories
        Display maxima internal directory information.


@need 150
@item     --disable-readline
        Disable readline support.


@need 150
@item     -g, --enable-lisp-debugger
        Enable underlying lisp debugger.

@need 150
@item     -Q, --quit-on-error
        Quit, and return an exit code 1, when Maxima encounters an error.

@need 150
@item     -h, --help
        Display this usage message.


@need 150
@item     --userdir=<directory>
        Use <directory> for user directory (default is %USERPROFILE%/maxima for
        Windows, and $HOME/.maxima for other operating systems).


@need 150
@item     --init=<file>
        Set the base name of the Maxima & Lisp initialization files (default is
        "maxima-init".) The last extension and any directory parts are removed
        to form the base name. The resulting files, <base>.mac and <base>.lisp
        are only searched for in userdir (see --userdir option). This may be
        specified for than once, but only the last is used.


@need 150
@item     -l <lisp>, --lisp=<lisp>
        Use lisp implementation <lisp>.


@need 150
@item     --list-avail
        List the installed version/lisp combinations.


@need 150
@item     -p <file>, --preload=<file>, --preload-lisp=<file>, --init-mac=<file>, --init-lisp=<file>
        Preload <file>, which may be any file time accepted by Maxima's LOAD
        function. The <file> is loaded before any other system initialization
        is done. This will be searched for in the locations given by
        file_search_maxima and file_search_lisp. This can be specified multiple
        times to load multiple files. The equivalent options --preload-lisp,
        --init-mac, and --init-lisp are deprecated.


@need 150
@item     -q, --quiet
        Suppress Maxima start-up message.

@need 150
@item     --very-quiet
        Suppress expression labels, the Maxima start-up message, verification of the HTML index and @code{load}-ing related messages.

@need 150
@item     --very-very-quiet
        In addition to @code{--very-quiet}, set @mref{ttyoff} to @code{true} to suppress most printed output.


@need 150
@item     -r <string>, --run-string=<string>
        Process maxima command(s) <string> in interactive mode.


@need 150
@item     -s <port>, --server=<port>
        Connect Maxima to server on <port>.


@need 150
@item     -u <version>, --use-version=<version>
        Use maxima version <version>.


@need 150
@item     -v, --verbose
        Display lisp invocation in maxima wrapper script.


@need 150
@item     --version
        Display the default installed version.


@need 150
@item     --very-quiet
        Suppress expression labels and Maxima start-up message.


@need 150
@item     -X <Lisp options>, --lisp-options=<Lisp options>
        Options to be given to the underlying Lisp


@need 150
@item     --no-init, --norc
        Do not load the init file(s) on startup


@need 150
@item     --no-verify-html-index
        Do not verify on startup that the set of html topics is consistent with
        text topics.


@end table

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Command-line Options}
@closecatbox
