\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-

@c 2000-04-17 Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com> Added header,
@c info directory entry, reference to introduction chapter, and menu
@c descriptions.  Rearranged chapters.

@c to update the menus do: 
@c (texinfo-multiple-files-update "maxima.texi" t t)
@c
@c texinfo-multiple-files-update will delete the detailed node listing!


@c %**start of header
@setfilename  maxima.info
@synindex vr fn
@settitle Maxima Manual
@c %**end of header
@setchapternewpage odd
@ifinfo
This is a Texinfo Maxima Manual

Copyright 1994,2001 William F. Schelter

@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Maxima: (maxima).     A computer algebra system.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo 
@macro var {expr}
<\expr\>
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@comment The title is printed in a large font.
@center @titlefont{Maxima Manual}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Maxima is a computer algebra system, implemented in Lisp.

Maxima is derived from the Macsyma system,
developed at MIT in the years 1968 through 1982 as part of Project MAC.
MIT turned over a copy of the Macsyma source code to the Department of Energy
in 1982; that version is now known as DOE Macsyma.
A copy of DOE Macsyma was maintained by Professor William F. Schelter
of the University of Texas from 1982 until his death in 2001.
In 1998, Schelter obtained permission from the Department of Energy
to release the DOE Macsyma source code under the GNU Public License,
and in 2000 he initiated the Maxima project at SourceForge to maintain
and develop DOE Macsyma, now called Maxima.

@end titlepage

@summarycontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction to Maxima, (dir), (dir)
@top

Maxima is a computer algebra system, implemented in Lisp.

Maxima is derived from the Macsyma system,
developed at MIT in the years 1968 through 1982 as part of Project MAC.
MIT turned over a copy of the Macsyma source code to the Department of Energy
in 1982; that version is now known as DOE Macsyma.
A copy of DOE Macsyma was maintained by Professor William F. Schelter
of the University of Texas from 1982 until his death in 2001.
In 1998, Schelter obtained permission from the Department of Energy
to release the DOE Macsyma source code under the GNU Public License,
and in 2000 he initiated the Maxima project at SourceForge to maintain
and develop DOE Macsyma, now called Maxima.
@end ifnottex

@c includes

@menu
Maxima infrastructure

* Introduction to Maxima::      Sample Maxima sessions.
* Bug Detection and Reporting:: Finding and reporting bugs in Maxima.
* Help::                        Asking for help from within a Maxima session.
* Command Line::                Maxima command line syntax.
* Operators::                   Operators used in Maxima expressions.
* Expressions::                 Expressions in Maxima.
* Simplification::              Simplifying expressions.
* Plotting::                    2D and 3D graphical output.
* Input and Output::            File input and output.
* Floating Point::              Low level numerical routines.
* Contexts::                    Sets of assumed facts.

Support for specific areas of mathematics

* Polynomials::                 Standard forms for polynomials, and
                                functions operating on them.
* Constants::                   Numerical constants.
* Logarithms::                  Manipulation of expressions involving
                                logarithms.
* Trigonometric::               Manipulating expressions with trig and
                                inverse trig functions.
* Special Functions::           Special functions
* Elliptic Functions::          Elliptic Functions and Integrals
* Limits::                      Limits of expressions.
* Differentiation::             Differential calculus.
* Integration::                 Integral calculus.
* Equations::                   Defining and solving equations.
* Differential Equations::      Defining and solving differential equations.
* Numerical::                   Numerical integration, Fourier
                                transforms, etc.
* Arrays::                      Creating and working with arrays.
* Matrices and Linear Algebra:: Matrix operations.
* Affine::                      
* itensor::                     Indicial Tensor Manipulation.
* ctensor::                     Component Tensor Manipulation.
* atensor::                     Algebraic Tensor Manipulation.
* Series::                      Taylor and power series.
* Number Theory::               Number theory.
* Symmetries::                  
* Groups::                      Abstract algebra.

Advanced facilities and programming

* Runtime Environment::         Customization of the Maxima environment.
* Miscellaneous Options::       Options with a global effect on Maxima.
* Rules and Patterns::          User defined pattern matching and
                                simplification rules.
* Lists::                       Manipulation of lists.
* Sets::                        Manipulation of sets.
* Function Definition::         Defining functions.
* Program Flow::                Defining Maxima programs.
* Debugging::                   Debugging Maxima programs.

Additional packages

* augmented_lagrangian::        augmented_lagrangian package.
* bode::                        Bode gain and phase plots.
* contrib_ode::                 Additional routines for ODEs
* descriptive::                 Descriptive statistics.
* diag::                        Jordan matrices.
* distrib::                     Probability distributions.
* draw::                        A Maxima-Gnuplot interface.
* dynamics::                    Graphics for dynamical systems and fractals.
* eval_string::                 Maxima expressions as strings.
* f90::                         Maxima to fortran translator.
* ggf::                         Generating function of sequences.
* grobner::                     Functions for working with Groebner bases.
* impdiff::                     Implicit derivatives.
* implicit_plot::               Implicit plots package.
* interpol::                    Interpolation package.
* lbfgs::                       L-BFGS unconstrained minimization package.
* lindstedt::                   Lindstedt package.
* linearalgebra::               Functions for linear algebra.
* lsquares::                    Least squares.
* makeOrders::                  Polynomial utility.
* mnewton::                     Newton's method.
* numericalio::                 Reading and writing files.
* opsubst::                     Substitutions utility.
* orthopoly::                   Orthogonal polynomials.
* plotdf::                      Direction fields plots.
* romberg::                     Romberg method for numerical integration.
* simplex::                     Linear programming.
* simplification::              Simplification rules and functions.
* solve_rec::                   Linear recurrences.
* stats::                       Statistical inference package.
* stirling::                    Stirling formula.
* stringproc::                  String processing.
* unit::                        Units and dimensions package.
* zeilberger::                  Functions for hypergeometric summation.


Index

* Function and Variable Index:: Index.

@comment @detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Introduction to Maxima::

Help

* Lisp and Maxima::            
* Garbage Collection::          
* Documentation::               
* Functions and Variables for Help::        

Command Line

* Introduction to Command Line::  
* Functions and Variables for Command Line::  

Operators

* nary::                        
* nofix::                       
* postfix::                     
* prefix::                      
* Arithmetic operators::    
* Relational operators::   
* General operators::

Expressions

* Introduction to Expressions::  
* Assignment::                  
* Complex::                     
* Inequality::                  
* Syntax::                      
* Functions and Variables for Expressions::  

Simplification

* Functions and Variables for Simplification::  

Plotting

* Functions and Variables for Plotting::    

Input and Output

* Comments::
* Files::                       
* Functions and Variables for Input and Output::  

Floating Point

* Functions and Variables for Floating Point::  

Contexts

* Functions and Variables for Contexts::    

Polynomials

* Introduction to Polynomials::  
* Functions and Variables for Polynomials::  

Constants

* Functions and Variables for Constants::   

Logarithms

* Functions and Variables for Logarithms::  

Trigonometric

* Introduction to Trigonometric::  
* Functions and Variables for Trigonometric::  

Special Functions

* Introduction to Special Functions::  
* Functions and Variables for Special Functions::  

Elliptic Functions

* Introduction to Elliptic Functions and Integrals::
* Functions and Variables for Elliptic Functions::
* Functions and Variables for Elliptic Integrals::

Limits

* Functions and Variables for Limits::      

Differentiation

* Functions and Variables for Differentiation::  

Integration

* Introduction to Integration::  
* Functions and Variables for Integration::  

Equations

* Functions and Variables for Equations::   

Differential Equations

* Introduction to Differential Equations::  
* Functions and Variables for Differential Equations::  

Numerical

* Introduction to Numerical::   
* Fourier packages::                     
* Functions and Variables for Numerical::   
* Functions and Variables for Fourier Series::

Arrays

* Functions and Variables for Arrays::  

Matrices and Linear Algebra

* Introduction to Matrices and Linear Algebra::  
* Dot::                         
* Vectors::                     
* eigen::
* Functions and Variables for Matrices and Linear Algebra::  

Affine

* Functions and Variables for Affine::      

itensor

* Introduction to itensor::      
* Functions and Variables for itensor::      

ctensor

* Introduction to ctensor::     
* Functions and Variables for ctensor::     

atensor

* Introduction to atensor::     
* Functions and Variables for atensor::     

Series

* Introduction to Series::      
* Functions and Variables for Series::      

Number Theory

* Functions and Variables for Number Theory::  

Symmetries

* Functions and Variables for Symmetries::  

Groups

* Functions and Variables for Groups::      

Runtime Environment

* Introduction for Runtime Environment::  
* Interrupts::                  
* Functions and Variables for Runtime Environment::  

Miscellaneous Options

* Introduction to Miscellaneous Options::  
* Share::                       
* Functions and Variables for Miscellaneous Options::  

Rules and Patterns

* Introduction to Rules and Patterns::  
* Functions and Variables for Rules and Patterns::  

Lists

* Introduction to Lists::       
* Functions and Variables for Lists::       

Sets

* Introduction to Sets::       
* Functions and Variables for Sets::       

Function Definition

* Introduction to Function Definition::  
* Function::                    
* Macros::                      
* Functions and Variables for Function Definition::  

Program Flow

* Introduction to Program Flow::  
* Functions and Variables for Program Flow::  

Debugging

* Functions and Variables for Debugging::   


augmented_lagrangian

* Functions and Variables for augmented_lagrangian::

bode

* Functions and Variables for bode::

contrib_ode

* Introduction to contrib_ode::
* Functions and Variables for contrib_ode::
* Possible improvements to contrib_ode::
* Test cases for contrib_ode::
* References for contrib_ode::

descriptive

* Introduction to descriptive::
* Functions and Variables for data manipulation::
* Functions and Variables for descriptive statistics::
* Functions and Variables for specific multivariate descriptive statistics::
* Functions and Variables for statistical graphs::

diag

* Functions and Variables for diag::

distrib

* Introduction to distrib::
* Functions and Variables for continuous distributions::
* Functions and Variables for discrete distributions::

draw

* Introduction to draw::
* Functions and Variables for draw::

dynamics

* Introduction to dynamics::
* Functions and Variables for dynamics::

eval_string

* Functions and Variables for eval_string::

f90

* Functions and Variables for f90::

ggf

* Functions and Variables for ggf::

grobner

* Introduction to grobner::
* Functions and Variables for grobner::

impdiff

* Functions and Variables for impdiff::

implicit_plot

* Functions and Variables for implicit_plot::

interpol

* Introduction to interpol::
* Functions and Variables for interpol::

lbfgs

* Introduction to lbfgs::
* Functions and Variables for lbfgs::

lindstedt

* Functions and Variables for lindstedt::

linearalgebra

* Introduction to linearalgebra::
* Functions and Variables for linearalgebra::

lsquares

* Functions and Variables for lsquares::

makeOrders

* Functions and Variables for makeOrders::

mnewton

* Functions and Variables for mnewton::

numericalio

* Introduction to numericalio::
* Functions and Variables for numericalio::

opsubst

* Functions and Variables for opsubst::

orthopoly

* Introduction to orthogonal polynomials::
* Functions and Variables for orthogonal polynomials::

plotdf

* Introduction to plotdf::
* Functions and Variables for plotdf::

romberg

* Functions and Variables for romberg::

simplex

* Introduction to simplex::
* Functions and Variables for simplex::

simplification

* Introduction to simplification::
* Functions and Variables for simplification::

solve_rec

* Introduction to solve_rec::
* Functions and Variables for solve_rec::

stats

* Introduction to stats::
* Functions and Variables for inference_result::
* Functions and Variables for stats::
* Functions and Variables for special distributions::

stirling

* Functions and Variables for stirling::

stringproc

* Introduction to string processing::
* Functions and Variables for input and output::
* Functions and Variables for characters::
* Functions and Variables for strings::

unit

* Introduction to Units::       
* Functions and Variables for Units::

zeilberger

* Introduction to zeilberger::
* Functions and Variables for zeilberger::

@comment @end detailmenu
@end menu

@c  Put the @node lines here, rather than in the @included files,
@c  so emacs can automatically update them with C-c C-u C-e.
@c  nota bene: C-c C-u C-a and texinfo-multiple-files-update will delete
@c  the detailed node listing!

@node Introduction to Maxima, Bug Detection and Reporting, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction to Maxima
@include Introduction.texi

@node Bug Detection and Reporting, Help, Introduction to Maxima, Top
@chapter Bug Detection and Reporting
@include Bugs.texi

@node Help, Command Line, Bug Detection and Reporting, Top
@chapter Help
@include Help.texi

@node Command Line, Operators, Help, Top
@chapter Command Line
@include Command.texi

@node Operators, Expressions, Command Line, Top
@chapter Operators
@include Operators.texi

@node Expressions, Simplification, Operators, Top
@chapter Expressions
@include Expressions.texi

@node Simplification, Plotting, Expressions, Top
@chapter Simplification
@include Simplification.texi

@node Plotting, Input and Output, Simplification, Top
@chapter Plotting
@include Plotting.texi

@node Input and Output, Floating Point, Plotting, Top
@chapter Input and Output
@include Input.texi

@node Floating Point, Contexts, Input and Output, Top
@chapter Floating Point
@include Floating.texi

@node Contexts, Polynomials, Floating Point, Top
@chapter Contexts
@include Contexts.texi

@node Polynomials, Constants, Contexts, Top
@chapter Polynomials
@include Polynomials.texi

@node Constants, Logarithms, Polynomials, Top
@chapter Constants
@include Constants.texi

@node Logarithms, Trigonometric, Constants, Top
@chapter Logarithms
@include Logarithms.texi

@node Trigonometric, Special Functions, Logarithms, Top
@chapter Trigonometric
@include Trigonometric.texi

@node Special Functions, Elliptic Functions, Trigonometric, Top
@chapter Special Functions
@include Special.texi

@node Elliptic Functions, Limits, Special Functions, Top
@chapter Elliptic Functions
@include Elliptic.texi

@node Limits, Differentiation, Elliptic Functions, Top
@chapter Limits
@include Limits.texi

@node Differentiation, Integration, Limits, Top
@chapter Differentiation
@include Differentiation.texi

@node Integration, Equations, Differentiation, Top
@chapter Integration
@include Integration.texi

@node Equations, Differential Equations, Integration, Top
@chapter Equations
@include Equations.texi

@node Differential Equations, Numerical, Equations, Top
@chapter Differential Equations
@include Differential.texi

@c @include NonCommutative.texi

@node Numerical, Arrays, Differential Equations, Top
@chapter Numerical
@include Numerical.texi

@node Arrays, Matrices and Linear Algebra, Numerical, Top
@chapter Arrays
@include Arrays.texi

@node Matrices and Linear Algebra, Affine, Arrays, Top
@chapter Matrices and Linear Algebra
@include Matrices.texi

@node Affine, itensor, Matrices and Linear Algebra, Top
@chapter Affine
@include Affine.texi

@node itensor, ctensor, Affine, Top
@chapter itensor
@include Itensor.texi

@node ctensor, atensor, itensor, Top
@chapter ctensor
@include Ctensor.texi

@node atensor, Series, ctensor, Top
@chapter atensor
@include Atensor.texi

@node Series, Number Theory, atensor, Top
@chapter Series
@include Series.texi

@node Number Theory, Symmetries, Series, Top
@chapter Number Theory
@include Number.texi

@node Symmetries, Groups, Number Theory, Top
@chapter Symmetries
@include Symmetries.texi

@node Groups, Runtime Environment, Symmetries, Top
@chapter Groups
@include Groups.texi

@node Runtime Environment, Miscellaneous Options, Groups, Top
@chapter Runtime Environment
@include Runtime.texi

@node Miscellaneous Options, Rules and Patterns, Runtime Environment, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous Options
@include Miscellaneous.texi

@node Rules and Patterns, Lists, Miscellaneous Options, Top
@chapter Rules and Patterns
@include Rules.texi

@node Lists, Sets, Rules and Patterns, Top
@chapter Lists
@include Lists.texi

@node Sets, Function Definition, Lists, Top
@chapter Sets
@include nset.texi

@node Function Definition, Program Flow, Sets, Top
@chapter Function Definition
@include Function.texi

@node Program Flow, Debugging, Function Definition, Top
@chapter Program Flow
@include Program.texi

@node Debugging, augmented_lagrangian, Program Flow, Top
@chapter Debugging
@include Debugging.texi

@node augmented_lagrangian, bode, Debugging, Top
@chapter augmented_lagrangian
@include augmented_lagrangian.texi

@node bode, contrib_ode, augmented_lagrangian, Top
@chapter bode
@include bode.texi

@node contrib_ode, descriptive, bode, Top
@chapter contrib_ode
@include contrib_ode.texi

@node descriptive, diag, contrib_ode, Top
@chapter descriptive
@include descriptive.texi

@node diag, distrib, descriptive, Top
@chapter diag
@include diag.texi

@node distrib, draw, diag, Top
@chapter distrib
@include distrib.texi

@node draw, dynamics, distrib, Top
@chapter draw
@include draw.texi

@node dynamics, eval_string, draw, Top
@chapter dynamics
@include dynamics.texi

@node eval_string, f90, dynamics, Top
@chapter eval_string
@include eval_string.texi

@node f90, ggf, eval_string, Top
@chapter f90
@include f90.texi

@node ggf, grobner, f90, Top
@chapter ggf
@include ggf.texi

@node grobner, impdiff, ggf, Top
@chapter grobner
@include grobner.texi

@node impdiff, implicit_plot, grobner, Top
@chapter impdiff
@include impdiff.texi

@node implicit_plot, interpol, impdiff, Top
@chapter implicit_plot
@include implicit_plot.texi

@node interpol, lbfgs, implicit_plot, Top
@chapter interpol
@include interpol.texi

@node lbfgs, lindstedt, interpol, Top
@chapter lbfgs
@include lbfgs.texi

@node lindstedt, linearalgebra, lbfgs, Top
@chapter lindstedt
@include lindstedt.texi

@node linearalgebra, lsquares, lindstedt, Top
@chapter linearalgebra
@include linearalgebra.texi

@node lsquares, makeOrders, linearalgebra, Top
@chapter lsquares
@include lsquares.texi

@node makeOrders, mnewton, lsquares, Top
@chapter makeOrders
@include makeOrders.texi

@node mnewton, numericalio, makeOrders, Top
@chapter mnewton
@include mnewton.texi

@node numericalio, opsubst, mnewton, Top
@chapter numericalio
@include numericalio.texi

@node opsubst, orthopoly, numericalio, Top
@chapter opsubst
@include opsubst.texi

@node orthopoly, plotdf, opsubst, Top
@chapter orthopoly
@include orthopoly.texi

@node plotdf, romberg, orthopoly, Top
@chapter plotdf
@include plotdf.texi

@node romberg, simplex, plotdf, Top
@chapter romberg
@include romberg.texi

@node simplex, simplification, romberg, Top
@chapter simplex
@include simplex.texi

@node simplification, solve_rec, simplex, Top
@chapter simplification
@include simplifications.texi

@node solve_rec, stats, simplification, Top
@chapter solve_rec
@include solve_rec.texi

@node stats, stirling, solve_rec, Top
@chapter stats
@include stats.texi

@node stirling, stringproc, stats, Top
@chapter stirling
@include stirling.texi

@node stringproc, unit, stirling, Top
@chapter stringproc
@include stringproc.texi

@node unit, zeilberger, stringproc, Top
@chapter unit
@include unit.texi

@node zeilberger, Function and Variable Index, unit, Top
@chapter zeilberger
@include zeilberger.texi

@node Function and Variable Index,  , zeilberger, Top
@chapter Indices
@include Indices.texi

@c end includes

@bye
