@node None, Function and Variable Index, Ctensor, Top
@chapter None
@menu
* Introduction to None::        
* Definitions for None::        
@end menu

@node Introduction to None, Definitions for None, None, None
@section Introduction to None
@section DILOGARITHMS
 - See POLYLOGARITHMS.

@section B
 (%o1)                             (N + 1)!

@section FILE
 - A file specification is a string such as "foo".  You may
also specify just the symbol foo.  So load("foo") and
load(foo) should do the same thing (unless foo has a value).
Symbols will be mapped to lower cases, and strings left alone.
There are various FILE_SEARCH lists.   see FILE_SEARCH.

@section HACIJAN
 - An implementation of Hacijan's linear programming algorithm
is available by doing BATCH("kach.mc")$.  Details of use are
available by doing BATCH("kach.dem");

@section IMSL
 - For information on MACSYMA-IMSL packages available do:
PRINTFILE(IMSL,USAGE,SHARE2); IMSL-based routines currently return
[SUCCESS, ...] or [ERROR, ...].  They will soon be changed to return
[SUCCESS, ...], [WARNING, ...] and [ERROR, ...].

@section INDEX_FILE_DIM
 ,symbol-returned-by-OPEN_INDEX_FILE) - returns an
integer indicating the number of expressions in the indexed file.
See DESCRIBE(OPEN_INDEX_FILE);.

@section IRREDUCIBLE
 - This command has been removed.

@section ITS
 - The operating system under which MACSYMA runs on the MIT-MC
machine.  It stands for "Incompatible Timesharing System".

@section MAP_OVER_INDEX_FILE
 ,|function, fileobject|) is convenient for
generating an index list of properties of the objects in a file vs.
their positions in the file.  See DESCRIBE(MAKE_INDEX_FILE);.

@section MODRESULT
 - This switch is obsolete.  The new RESULTANT switch should
be used.  Do DESCRIBE(RESULTANT); for details.

@section MORE
 Processing - The term used to describe the action of a CRT
console when it stops at the bottom of the screen to allow the user
to finish reading.  See PAGEPAUSE and MOREWAIT for details.

@section NTRIG
 - SHARE1;NTRIG FASL allows MACSYMA to compute trig functions
with arguments of the form N*%PI/10 for integer N.  Do LOAD(NTRIG) to
access this. The main functions are USIN(N) and UCOS(N).

@section NUMERICAL
 - There are a number of packages for numerical methods in
MACSYMA.  See IMSL and the SHARE directories.

@section SET
 - See Sets.

@section STORENUM
 - The value of this variable, an integer, is the second name
of the last file written by the automatic storage scheme.  (See
DESCRIBE(DSKGC)).  Each time a file is written, STORENUM is first
increased by 1, so it must always be an integer.  It is initially set
to 1000.

@section UPDATE
 - The Update file has been moved to the MACDOC directory, so
you should do PRINTFILE(UPDATE,>,MACDOC); to read it.  Also, you may
find information of a useful nature on this directory, so you may want 
to list it (LISTFILES(MACDOC); in MACSYMA) and print some other files
also.
Here follows a list of changes to MACSYMA since the Version 10
manual.  Do DESCRIBE(cmd); to see their documentation:
New Functions or variables: LCM, RNCOMBINE.
New SHARE packages of interest:  ATRIG1, NTRIG.
The following functions have been removed from MACSYMA:  TRIGSUM.

@section ---Begin
 new doc by wfs
@section EDITOR-ZMACS
 The lisp machine version of macsyma contains many helpful
editor commands.  The best way to find out about them is to do Meta-X
Apropos the string "macsyma" since most of the commands involve this
name.  Macsyma Mode is obtained by doing the extended command Macsyma
mode.  When in macsyma mode the keysrokes such as ctrl-shift-C refer to
compiling macsyma code in a marked region, or else between the $ or ;
delimiters if no region is marked.

It is possible to evaluate expressions into the buffer by typing
control-shift-I (for example a line label %o3 has a value you want to
alter).  The macsyma evaluator will be called on the current region and
the result will be ground into the buffer.  It can then be altered and
reevaluated by using control-shift-E to evaluate it.


@section FILENAMES--lispm
   Since source files for Macsyma on the lisp machines
will often be on many different machines, it is difficult to have a good
file search mechanism.  The best thing for a user to do is to specify a
file name as a string, as fully as he finds necessary.  The syntax
should be that of the machine on which the file resides.  For example
BATCH("/home/wfs/test.mac") or
DEMO("/home/wfs/defint.dmo") are valid specifications, for a
Using the input editor long pathnames are typed rather easily,
and of course there is always the option of defining a logical pathname
to stand for them.

The current logical pathnames for the sources should be
"Maxima-source:maxima;foo.lisp".

@section FUNCTION-ARGUMENTS
 To find the function argument of a function when in
the input editor of a macsyma listener you may type Control-meta-A when
the cursor is placed just after the name of the function.  Unfortunately
some macsyma functions use variable names which are not very suggestive.
If a function takes keyword arguments, these can be entered at macsyma
level by typing ?:..  . For example if you want to call the common lisp
function member which takes a keyword test you would enter

 AA:MAKE_HASH_TABLE(?:TEST,?EQL); 

This will use the lisp function eql for comparison of entries in AA.
AA[1]:2;
AA[1]; ==> 2.

@section MACSYMA-LISTENER
 Select A (or System A) selects the most current 
macsyma listener.  You may also click on the system menu, and create
new different shaped listeners.   The line labels are shared among 
the listeners, so that you may refer to line labels defined in one
window, in another window.  

Enabling or disabling more-processing (the pause at the end of a page of
display) is done as with lisp listeners (eg. use the function key).

@section HELP--see
:documentation  

@section  XXX



@c end concepts None
@node Definitions for None,  , Introduction to None, None
@section Definitions for None
@defun COMPRESS
 - This command has been withdrawn, see COLLAPSE.

@end defun
@defun COMPRESS_FILE
 - This command has been withdrawn, see COLLAPSE.

@end defun
@defvar CURSOR
 default: [$] is the prompt symbol of the MACSYMA editor.

@end defvar
@defun DISKUSE 
(username) returns the total number of disk blocks in use by a
user.  The result is of the form <n>*BLOCKS

@end defun
@defvar DOVARD_VIEWPORT
 default: [1,7,1,7] determines the perspective for
Dover output plots, similar to VIEWPT.  It accepts 4 arguments,
[XMIN,XMAX,YMIN,YMAX] in inches on the page.

@end defvar
@defvar DSKGC
 default: [FALSE] if TRUE will cause user defined values,
functions, arrays, and line labelled expressions to be automatically
stored on disk whenever the system determines that the available
in-core space is getting low.  (For historical reasons this is also
a function, but it should be used as a switch.  Please use it as
described here, not as a function.)

@end defvar
@defvar DSKUSE
 default: [FALSE] if TRUE, from this point in the computation
on labelled expressions will be written out periodically onto the
disk.  (A labelled expression is one which is referred to by a line
label, e.g. %o4, %i7, %t12.)  Once an expression is written onto the disk
it will no longer reside in main memory and most of the main memory
storage taken up by it will be released. When the user attempts to
reference an expression which has been stored onto the disk, MACSYMA
will retrieve the correct value from the disk file.

@end defvar
@defvar DYNAMALLOC
 default: [FALSE] if TRUE will allocate additional space
whenever necessary.

@end defvar
@defun ED 
() - calls the NIL editor, which is called STEVE.  STEVE is an editor
for CRT consoles, which is best at speeds of 1200 baud or greater.
The interface it presents is close to that of the EMACS editor used
on the TOPS-20 and ITS operating systems.  Doing
	TEACH_STEVE();
will run a tutorial on the editor.   At this time it is unfortunately
not possible to either "zap" an expression from a command line into
the editor, nor to "zap" an edited expression back to MACSYMA for
evaluation;  however, the editor can be used for file editing.
DESCRIBE(EDITOR) for information about the MACSYMA line editor.

@end defun
@defun EDITOR
 - There is a line editor in MACSYMA, which you may enter by typing
an altmode (the "esc" key on most consoles) for PDP-10 and NIL versions
of MACSYMA, and & (ampersand) for Multics.  Your current command line
will be automatically brought into the editor for you to edit.  Commands
are terminated by two altmodes (two &'s on Multics).  An additional
two altmodes will return you to MACSYMA with the edited string on your
command line.
Some useful commands:
Command         Action
-------         ______
nC              moves the cursor past n characters.
nR              moves the cursor past n characters in the
                 reverse direction (nR = -nC).
nSstring<$>     moves the cursor to the right (left if n is
                 negative) of the nth occurrence of "string" in
                 the input string.
) or ]          moves the cursor right from the current position
                 over the next balanced pair of parentheses (or
                 brackets).
( or [          similar to ) or ] but moves left.
nD              deletes n characters, and saves them in the
                 "save-register" (see the GR command below).
nK              deletes all the characters through the nth carriage return
                 (0K kills left), and saves them in the "save-register";
                 e.g., K deletes the remainder of this line.
Istring<$>      inserts the characters "string" at the current cursor
                 position.  The cursor is positioned at the right of
                 the inserted text.  If no argument is given then the
                 string of the last I command which had one is used.
GR              inserts at the current cursor position the characters
                 deleted by the last use of D or K.  Thus GR may be used
                 in combination with D or K to move characters from one
                 place to another in the input string; or to recover
                 from an accidental use of D or K.  There is only one
                 "save-register".

@end defun
@defun EMACS 
() - calls the NIL editor.  DESCRIBE(ED) for more information.
The name EMACS derives from the editor of that name used on the ITS
and TOPS-20 operating systems.

@end defun
@defun FILEOP
 - SHARE;FILEOP -- some file primitives for MC Macsyma users.
Macsyma now provides some useful simple file primitives which were
formerly only available in other system programs.
To print the contents of a file on your terminal, say
PRINTFILE(file,name,dsk,me);
To list your directory, say LISTFILES(dsk,me).  If you use a shared
directory such as USERS or PLASMA, only your files--the ones
with your login name as first file name--will be shown.
The length and date of creation of each file is also shown.
The function FILELENGTH returns the length of the file argument
in blocks and fractional blocks.
In order to list just the names of your files without the
length and date information, use QLISTFILES (Quick LIST Files)
with the same arguments as LISTFILES.
The function RENAMEFILE(oldname,newname) renames a file from oldname
to newname.
Details.
The PRINTFILE command takes the same argument syntax as LOADFILE;
the other two take the syntax of WRITEFILE.  LISTFILES indicates
whether each file is stored on secondary disk and whether it
has been backed up to tape (an exclamation point appears if
it has not).
The FILELENGTH command returns the length in blocks and fractional
blocks: there are five characters in a word and 1024 words in a disk block.
(So if it returns 5.6, the file is 6 blocks long, but the last block
is only 60% full.  This file would be 5.6*1024*5 (= 28672) characters
long.)  If the file named does not exist, an error message is printed,
and False is returned to permit easier recovery in a program.
Files may not be renamed across directories or devices. Both oldname
and newname must be on the same directory. Renaming a file to a filename
that already exists gives an error. You must explicitly DELFILE the
existing file first if that's what you want.  Both oldname and newname
must be list-type filespecs. example: 
RENAMEFILE([myold,file,dsk,foo],[mynew,file]);

@end defun
@defvar FILESIZE
 default: [] - The value of this variable is the number of
expressions written into each file by the automatic disk storage
scheme.  The default value is 16.

@end defvar
@defun FULLDISKUSE 
(username) If no name is supplied, it defaults to the
current user's.  Returns long list of info about user's disk usage of
the form:
  [["TOTAL FREE BLOCKS", [<pack-type>, <pack-number>, <n> BLOCKS],
                         [<pack-type>, <pack-number>, <n> BLOCKS], ...]
   ["DIRECTORY BLOCK USAGE", <directory-name>
                             ["PRIMARY", <n> BLOCKS],
                             ["SECONDARY", <n> BLOCKS]]
   ["USER BLOCK USAGE", <user-name>,
                        [PRIMARY, <n> BLOCKS],
                        [SECONDARY, <n> BLOCKS]]]
If the user has his own directory, the last element of the list ("USER
BLOCK USAGE") is omitted since it would be the same as "DIRECTORY
BLOCK USAGE".
        <pack-type> ::= "PRIMARY PACK" or "SECONDARY PACK"
        <pack-number> ::= a fixed point number
        <n> ::= a fixed point number
Occurrences of `<n> BLOCKS' are in the form of a Macsyma multiplication
between a fixnum <n> and the Macsyma symbol BLOCKS.

@end defun
@defun DIRECTORY(path)
List files in path.   Path may be something like "/home/wfs/*.mac"


@end defun
@defun LOGOUT 
() - causes the user to be logged out and all jobs deleted.
This is useful when it is desired to BATCH in a file and have the
terminal logged out automatically when the computations are finished.
This causes the process which invoked MACSYMA to execute a LOGOUT
command.

@end defun
@defun MAIL 
("message") will send mail to MACSYMA.  This may be used to report
problems or bugs.
MAIL(username,"message") will send mail to a specific user.
Expressions may be included by referring to them, outside double
quotes, when (and only when) a username is given, e.g.
MAIL(ELLEN,"I am trying to integrate",%o3,"but it asks for more list
space.  What should I do?");
Not supported yet in NIL Macsyma.

@end defun
@defun MAKE_INDEX_FILE 
("filename"); will parse a batch file without
evaluating it.  This is useful for debugging init files.  See
DESCRIBE(init); and DESCRIBE(OPEN_INDEX_FILE);.

@end defun
@defvar MOREWAIT
 default: [FALSE] - Controls the action of more processing.
Currently in NIL Macsyma, the setting of this has no effect.
When output is suspended and a --Pause-- or --More Display?-- prompt
is issued, one may type a space to continue the output.  Typing any
character other than space or rubout (delete) will continue the output,
and leave the character around to be read as part of the next c-line
and possibly intervening --Pause-- prompts.

@end defvar


@end defun

@end defun
@defvar PAGEPAUSE
 default: [] - This is set by MACSYMA according to what the
system knows about your terminal type.  If it is set to TRUE, then
"more" processing, which involves the printing of --More display?-- or
--Pause-- at the bottom of your screen or after so many lines on a
printing terminal, and pausing, will be enabled.  It may be set to
FALSE to turn off the "more" processing on a display terminal.
PAGEPAUSE is sometimes useful in batch files on slow lines where you
just wish to watch the output run past, and can keep up with the line
speed well enough.

@end defvar
@defun PAUSE 
() - Causes the display to "pause", printing "--Pause--" and
waiting for the usual "space" for "yes" to resume printing.  Then it
clears the screen and continues.  PAUSE("--Something else--"); will
use "--Something else--" as the string printed instead of "--Pause--".
PAUSE("--Something else--","--And some more--"); will use "--Something
else--" instead of "--Pause--" and "--And some more--" instead of
"--Continued--".

@end defun

@defun RENAMEFILE 
(oldfilename, newfilename) - Gives a new name to a file.
Oldfilename may name any file. It should use the list filename format
- eg, [MYOLD,FILE,DSK,USERS5].  Newfilename must be a filename on the
same device and directory.  Hence only filename1 and filename2 should
be specified.  For example, [MYNEW,FILE].  Attempting to change the
name of a file that does not exist, or to rename a file to the name of
a file that exists already will generate an error; hence, it is not
possible to inadvertently destroy a file using this command.

@end defun

@defun TAG_FILE_INSERT 
(file-to-insert-into, file-to-insert) - Inserts a file
created by the translator into a multiple entry tags file.

@end defun
@defun TIMEDATE 
() prints out the current date and time.

@end defun

@defvar VERSION
 default: [5,4,"Wed Oct ..."] - are the major and minor versions of MAXIMA.
This could be useful if the user wants to label his output, or to associate
bugs with a particular version.

@end defvar

@c BEGIN ITEMS CUT FROM Input.texi 20041031
@defun BACKUP ()
To "back up" and see what you did, see PLAYBACK.

@end defun

@defvar BATCHKILL
 default: [FALSE] if TRUE then the effect of all previous
BATCH files is nullified because a KILL(ALL) and a RESET() will be
done automatically when the next one is read in.  If BATCHKILL is
bound to any other atom then a KILL of the value of BATCHKILL will be
done.

@end defvar

@defun BATCON (argument)
continues BATCHing in a file which was interrupted.

@end defun

@defvar BATCOUNT
 default: [0] may be set to the number of the last expression
BATCHed in from a file.  Thus BATCON(BATCOUNT-1) will resume BATCHing
from the expression before the last BATCHed in from before.

@end defvar

@defvar CHANGE_FILEDEFAULTS
 default: [TRUE] on PDP10 systems, and FALSE
elsewhere.  Controls whether the user doing a LOADFILE or BATCH has
his file defaults changed to the file LOADFILEd or BATCHed.  The TRUE
setting is for people who like DDT-style file defaulting.  The FALSE
setting is for people who like the conventions of other operating
systems, who like LISP-style file defaulting, or who write packages
which do LOADFILEs or BATCHes which should not interfere with their
user's file defaults.

@end defvar

@defvar DIREC
 - The value of this variable is the default file directory for
SAVE, STORE, FASSAVE, and STRINGOUT.  It is initialized to the user's
login name, if he has a disk directory, and to one of the USERSi
directories otherwise.  DIREC determines to what directory disk files
will be written.

@end defvar

@defvar DSKALL
 default: [] If TRUE will cause values, functions, arrays, and
rules to be written periodically onto the disk in addition to labelled
expressions.  TRUE is the default value whereas if DSKALL is FALSE
then only labelled expresions will be written.

@end defvar

@defvar FILENAME
 default: [] - The value of this variable is the first name
of the files which are generated by the automatic disk storage scheme.
The default value is the first three characters of the user's login
name concatenated with the lowest unused integer, e.g. ECR1.

@end defvar

@defvar FILENUM
 default: [0] - The default second file name for files generated
by SAVE, STRINGOUT, or FASSAVE if no file names are specified by the
user.  It is an integer, and is incremented by one each time a new file
is written.

@end defvar

@defvar FILE_STRING_PRINT
 default: [FALSE] on MC, [TRUE] elsewhere.  If
TRUE, filenames are output as strings; if FALSE, as lists.  For
example, the message when an out of core file is loaded into
MACSYMA (e.g. the LIMIT package), appears on MC in list format as
  LIMIT FASL DSK MACSYM being loaded
and in string format as:
  DSK:MACSYM;LIMIT FASL being loaded
The string format is like the top level (DDT) file specifications.

@end defvar

@defvar LINEDISP
 default: [TRUE] - Allows the use of line graphics in the
drawing of equations on those systems which support them (e.g. the
Lisp Machine).  This can be disabled by setting LINEDISP to FALSE.  It
is automatically disabled during WRITEFILE.

@end defvar

@defun NOSTRING (arg)
displays all input lines when playing back rather than
STRINGing them.  If arg is GRIND then the display will be in a more
readable format.  One may include any number of options as in
PLAYBACK([5,10],20,TIME,SLOW).

@end defun

@defvar PARSEWINDOW
 default:[10] - the maximum number of "lexical tokens"
that are printed out on each side of the error-point when a syntax
(parsing) error occurs.  This option is especially useful on slow
terminals.  Setting it to -1 causes the entire input string to be
printed out when an error occurs.

@end defvar

@defun SPRINT (exp1, exp2, ...)
evaluates and displays its arguments one
after the other "on a line" starting at the leftmost position.  The
numbers are printed with the '-' right next to the number, and
it disregards line length.   
@end defun
@c END ITEMS CUT FROM Input.texi 20041031

