@menu
* Introduction to pslq::
* Functions and Variables for pslq::
@end menu

@node Introduction to pslq, Functions and Variables for pslq, pslq-pkg, pslq-pkg
@section Introduction to pslq

Package @code{pslq} contains two functions.

(1) @code{guess_exact_value} tries to find
an exact equivalent for an inexact number (float or bigfloat).

(2) @code{pslq_integer_relation} tries to find
integer coefficients such that a linear combination of inexact numbers
is approximately zero.

@node Functions and Variables for pslq, , Introduction to pslq, pslq-pkg
@section Functions and Variables for pslq

@deffn {Function} guess_exact_value (@var{x})

When @var{x} is a floating point number or bigfloat,
@code{guess_exact_value} tries to find an exact expression
(in terms of radicals, logarithms, exponentials, and the constant @code{%pi})
which is nearly equal to the given number.
If @code{guess_exact_value} cannot find such an expression,
@var{x} is returned unchanged.

When @var{x} is rational number or other mapatom
(other than a float or bigfloat),
@var{x} is returned unchanged.

Otherwise, @var{x} is a nonatomic expression,
and @code{guess_exact_value} is applied to each of the arguments of @var{x}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c load ("pslq.mac");
@c root: float (sin (%pi/12));
@c guess_exact_value (root);
@c L: makelist (root^i, i, 0, 4);
@c m: pslq_integer_relation(%);
@c makelist (x^i, i, 0, 4) . m;
@c solve(%);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) load ("pslq.mac");
(%o1)                       pslq.mac
(%i2) root: float (sin (%pi/12));
(%o2)                  0.2588190451025207
(%i3) guess_exact_value (root);
                        sqrt(2 - sqrt(3))
(%o3)                   -----------------
                                2
(%i4) L: makelist (root^i, i, 0, 4);
(%o4) [1.0, 0.2588190451025207, 0.06698729810778066, 
                       0.01733758853025369, 0.004487298107780675]
(%i5) m: pslq_integer_relation(%);
(%o5)                 [- 1, 0, 16, 0, - 16]
(%i6) makelist (x^i, i, 0, 4) . m;
                             4        2
(%o6)                 (- 16 x ) + 16 x  - 1
(%i7) solve(%);
             sqrt(sqrt(3) + 2)      sqrt(sqrt(3) + 2)
(%o7) [x = - -----------------, x = -----------------, 
                     2                      2
                        sqrt(2 - sqrt(3))      sqrt(2 - sqrt(3))
                  x = - -----------------, x = -----------------]
                                2                      2
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn {Function} pslq_integer_relation (@var{L})

Implements the PSLQ algorithm [1] to find integer relations between bigfloat numbers.

For a given list @var{L} of floating point numbers,
@code{pslq_integer_relation} returns a list of integers @var{m}
such that @code{@var{m} . @var{L} = 0}
(with absolute residual error less than @code{pslq_threshold}).

[1] D.H.Bailey: Integer Relation Detection and Lattice Reduction.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c load ("pslq.mac");
@c root: float (sin (%pi/12));
@c L: makelist (root^i, i, 0, 4);
@c m: pslq_integer_relation(%);
@c m . L;
@c float (10^(2 - fpprec));
@c is (abs (m . L) < 10^(2 - fpprec));
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) load ("pslq.mac");
(%o1)                       pslq.mac
(%i2) root: float (sin (%pi/12));
(%o2)                  0.2588190451025207
(%i3) L: makelist (root^i, i, 0, 4);
(%o3) [1.0, 0.2588190451025207, 0.06698729810778066, 
                       0.01733758853025369, 0.004487298107780675]
(%i4) m: pslq_integer_relation(%);
(%o4)                 [- 1, 0, 16, 0, - 16]
(%i5) m . L;
(%o5)                - 2.359223927328458E-16
(%i6) float (10^(2 - fpprec));
(%o6)                        1.0E-14
(%i7) is (abs (m . L) < 10^(2 - fpprec));
(%o7)                         true
@end example
@end deffn

@defvr {Variable} pslq_precision
Default value: @code{10^(fpprec - 2)}

Maximum magnitude of some intermediate results in @code{pslq_integer_relation}.
The search fails if one of the intermediate results has elements
larger than @code{pslq_precision}.

@end defvr

@defvr {Variable} pslq_threshold
Default value: @code{10^(2 - fpprec)}

Threshold for absolute residual error of integer relation found by @code{pslq_integer_relation}.

@end defvr

@defvr {Variable} pslq_depth
Default value: @code{20 * @var{n}}

Number of iterations of the PSLQ algorithm.

The default value is 20 times @var{n},
where @var{n} is the length of the list of numbers supplied to @code{pslq_integer_relation}.

@end defvr

@defvr {Variable} pslq_status

Indicates success or failure for an integer relation search by @code{pslq_integer_relation}.

When @code{pslq_status} is 1, it indicates an integer relation was found,
and the absolute residual error is less than @code{pslq_threshold}.

When @code{pslq_status} is 2, it indicates an integer relation was not found
because some intermediate results are larger than @code{pslq_precision}.

When @code{pslq_status} is 3, it indicates an integer relation was not found
because the number of iterations @code{pslq_depth} was reached.

@end defvr

@c SEEMS TO OBSCURE FOR USER-LEVEL DOCUMENTATION
@c @defvr {Variable} pslq_fail_norm
@c @end defvr

