@menu
* Introduction for Runtime Environment::  
* Interrupts::                  
* Functions and Variables for Runtime Environment::  
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Introduction for Runtime Environment, Interrupts, Runtime Environment, Runtime Environment
@section Introduction for Runtime Environment
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c THIS DISCUSSION OF maxima-init.mac REPLACES AN EARLIER WRITE-UP. !!!
@c HOWEVER IT SEEMS THAT THIS TEXT REALLY WANTS TO BE UNDER A DIFFERENT HEADING. !!!
@code{maxima-init.mac} is a file which is loaded automatically when Maxima
starts.  You can use @code{maxima-init.mac} to customize your Maxima
environment.  @code{maxima-init.mac}, if it exists, is typically placed in the
directory named by @code{maxima_userdir},
although it can be in any directory searched by the function @code{file_search}.

Here is an example @code{maxima-init.mac} file:

@example
setup_autoload ("specfun.mac", ultraspherical, assoc_legendre_p);
showtime:all;
@end example

In this example, @code{setup_autoload} tells Maxima to load the
specified file
(@code{specfun.mac}) if any of the functions (@code{ultraspherical},
@code{assoc_legendre_p}) are called but not yet defined.
Thus you needn't remember to load the file before calling the functions.

The statement @code{showtime: all} tells Maxima to set the @code{showtime}
variable.  The @code{maxima-init.mac} file can contain any other assignments or
other Maxima statements.

@opencatbox
@category{Session management}
@closecatbox

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Interrupts, Functions and Variables for Runtime Environment, Introduction for Runtime Environment, Runtime Environment
@section Interrupts
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The user can stop a time-consuming computation with the
^C (control-C) character.
The default action is to stop the computation
and print another user prompt.
In this case, it is not possible to restart a stopped computation.

If the Lisp variable @code{*debugger-hook*} is set to @code{nil}, by executing

@example
:lisp (setq *debugger-hook* nil)
@end example

@noindent
then upon receiving ^C, Maxima will enter the Lisp debugger,
and the user may use the debugger to inspect the Lisp environment.
The stopped computation can be restarted by entering
@code{continue} in the Lisp debugger.
The means of returning to Maxima from the Lisp debugger
(other than running the computation to completion)
is different for each version of Lisp.

On Unix systems, the character ^Z (control-Z) causes Maxima
to stop altogether, and control is returned to the shell prompt.
The @code{fg} command causes Maxima
to resume from the point at which it was stopped.

@opencatbox
@category{Console interaction}
@closecatbox

@c end concepts Runtime Environment

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Functions and Variables for Runtime Environment,  , Interrupts, Runtime Environment
@section Functions and Variables for Runtime Environment
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{maxima_tempdir}
@defvr {System variable} maxima_tempdir

@code{maxima_tempdir} names the directory in which Maxima creates some temporary
files.  In particular, temporary files for plotting are created in
@code{maxima_tempdir}.

The initial value of @code{maxima_tempdir} is the user's home directory, if
Maxima can locate it; otherwise Maxima makes a guess about a suitable directory.

@code{maxima_tempdir} may be assigned a string which names a directory.

@opencatbox
@category{Global variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{maxima_userdir}
@defvr {System variable} maxima_userdir

@code{maxima_userdir} names a directory which Maxima searches to find Maxima and
Lisp files.  (Maxima searches some other directories as well;
@code{file_search_maxima} and @code{file_search_lisp} are the complete lists.)

The initial value of @code{maxima_userdir} is a subdirectory of the user's home
directory, if Maxima can locate it; otherwise Maxima makes a guess about a
suitable directory.

@code{maxima_userdir} may be assigned a string which names a directory.
However, assigning to @code{maxima_userdir} does not automatically change
@code{file_search_maxima} and @code{file_search_lisp};
those variables must be changed separately.

@opencatbox
@category{Global variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{room}
@deffn  {Function} room @
@fname{room} () @
@fname{room} (true) @
@fname{room} (false)

Prints out a description of the state of storage and
stack management in Maxima.  @code{room} calls the Lisp function of 
the same name.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{room ()} prints out a moderate description.
@item
@code{room (true)} prints out a verbose description.
@item
@code{room (false)} prints out a terse description.
@end itemize

@opencatbox
@category{Debugging}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{sstatus}
@deffn {Function} sstatus (@var{keyword}, @var{item})

When @var{keyword} is the symbol @code{feature}, @var{item} is put on the list
of system features.  After @code{sstatus (keyword, item)} is executed,
@code{status (feature, item)} returns @code{true}.  If @var{keyword} is the
symbol @code{nofeature}, @var{item} is deleted from the list of system features.
This can be useful for package writers, to keep track of what features they have
loaded in.

See also @mrefdot{status}

@opencatbox
@category{Programming}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{status}
@deffn  {Function} status @
@fname{status} (@code{feature}) @
@fname{status} (@code{feature}, @var{item})

Returns information about the presence or absence of certain system-dependent 
features.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{status (feature)} returns a list of system features. These include Lisp 
version, operating system type, etc. The list may vary from one Lisp type to 
another.

@item 
@code{status (feature, item)} returns @code{true} if @var{item} is on the
list of items returned by @code{status (feature)} and @code{false} otherwise.
@code{status} quotes the argument @var{item}. The quote-quote operator 
@code{'@w{}'} defeats quotation. A feature whose name contains a special 
character, such as a hyphen, must be given as a string argument. For example,
@code{status (feature, "ansi-cl")}.
@end itemize

See also @mrefdot{sstatus}

The variable @code{features} contains a list of features which apply to 
mathematical expressions. See @code{features} and @code{featurep} for more 
information.

@opencatbox
@category{Programming}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{system}
@deffn {Function} system (@var{command})

Executes @var{command} as a separate process.  The command is passed to the
default shell for execution.  @code{system} is not supported by all operating
systems, but generally exists in Unix and Unix-like environments.

Supposing @code{_hist.out} is a list of frequencies which you wish to plot as a
bar graph using @code{xgraph}.

@example
(%i1) (with_stdout("_hist.out",
           for i:1 thru length(hist) do (
             print(i,hist[i]))),
       system("xgraph -bar -brw .7 -nl < _hist.out"));
@end example

In order to make the plot be done in the background (returning control to
Maxima) and remove the temporary file after it is done do:

@example
system("(xgraph -bar -brw .7 -nl < _hist.out;  rm -f _hist.out)&")
@end example
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{time}
@deffn {Function} time (%o1, %o2, %o3, @dots{})

Returns a list of the times, in seconds, taken to compute the output lines
@code{%o1}, @code{%o2}, @code{%o3}, @dots{} The time returned is Maxima's
estimate of the internal computation time, not the elapsed time.  @code{time}
can only be applied to output line variables; for any other variables,
@code{time} returns @code{unknown}.

Set @code{showtime: true} to make Maxima print out the computation time 
and elapsed time with each output line.

@opencatbox
@category{Debugging}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{timedate}
@deffn {Function} timedate @
@fname{timedate} (@var{T}, @var{tz_offset}) @
@fname{timedate} (@var{T}) @
@fname{timedate} ()

@code{timedate(@var{T}, @var{tz_offset})} returns a string
representing the time @var{T} in the time zone @var{tz_offset}.
The string format is @code{YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS.NNN[+|-]ZZ:ZZ}
(using as many digits as necessary to represent the fractional part)
if @var{T} has a nonzero fractional part,
or @code{YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS[+|-]ZZ:ZZ} if its fractional part is zero.

@var{T} measures time, in seconds, since midnight, January 1, 1900,
in the GMT time zone.

@var{tz_offset} measures the offset of the time zone, in hours,
east (positive) or west (negative) of GMT.
@var{tz_offset} must be an integer, rational, or float between -24 and 24, inclusive.
If @var{tz_offset} is not a multiple of 1/60, 
it is rounded to the nearest multiple of 1/60.

@code{timedate(@var{T})} is equivalent to @code{timedate(@var{T}, @var{tz_offset})}
with @var{tz_offset} equal to the offset of the local time zone.

@code{timedate()} is equivalent to @code{timedate(absolute_real_time())}.
That is, it returns the current time in the local time zone.

Example:

@code{timedate} with no argument returns a string representing the current time and date.

@c ===beg===
@c d : timedate ();
@c print ("timedate reports current time", d) $
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) d : timedate ();
(%o1)                      2010-06-08 04:08:09+01:00
(%i2) print ("timedate reports current time", d) $
timedate reports current time 2010-06-08 04:08:09+01:00
@end example

@code{timedate} with an argument returns a string representing the argument.

@c ===beg===
@c timedate (0);
@c timedate (absolute_real_time () - 7*24*3600);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) timedate (0);
(%o1)                      1900-01-01 01:00:00+01:00
(%i2) timedate (absolute_real_time () - 7*24*3600);
(%o2)                      2010-06-01 04:19:51+01:00
@end example

@code{timedate} with optional timezone offset.

@c ===beg===
@c timedate (1000000000, -9.5);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) timedate (1000000000, -9.5);
(%o1)               1931-09-09 16:16:40-09:30
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{parse_timedate}
@deffn  {Function} parse_timedate @
@fname{parse_timedate} (@var{S})

Parses a string @var{S} representing a date or date and time of day
and returns the number of seconds since midnight, January 1, 1900 GMT.
If there is a nonzero fractional part, the value returned is a rational number,
otherwise, it is an integer.
@code{parse_timedate} returns @code{false}
if it cannot parse @var{S} according to any of the allowed formats.

The string @var{S} must have one of the following formats,
optionally followed by a timezone designation:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{YYYY-MM-DD[ T]hh:mm:ss[,.]nnn}
@item
@code{YYYY-MM-DD[ T]hh:mm:ss}
@item
@code{YYYY-MM-DD}
@end itemize

where the fields are year, month, day, hours, minutes, seconds, and fraction of a second,
and square brackets indicate acceptable alternatives.
The fraction may contain one or more digits.

Except for the fraction of a second,
each field must have exactly the number of digits indicated:
four digits for the year, and two for the month, day of the month, hours, minutes, and seconds.

A timezone designation must have one of the following forms:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{[+-]hh:mm}
@item
@code{[+-]hhmm}
@item
@code{[+-]hh}
@item
@code{Z}
@end itemize

where @code{hh} and @code{mm} indicate hours and minutes east (@code{+}) or west (@code{-}) of GMT.
The timezone may be from +24 hours (inclusive) to -24 hours (inclusive).

A literal character @code{Z} is equivalent to @code{+00:00} and its variants,
indicating GMT.

If no timezone is indicated,
the time is assumed to be in the local time zone.

Any leading or trailing whitespace (space, tab, newline, and carriage return) is ignored,
but any other leading or trailing characters cause @code{parse_timedate} to fail and return @code{false}.

See also @mref{timedate} and @mrefdot{absolute_real_time}

Examples:

Midnight, January 1, 1900, in the local time zone, in each acceptable format.
The result is the number of seconds the local time zone
is ahead (negative result) or behind (positive result) GMT.
In this example, the local time zone is 8 hours behind GMT.

@c ===beg===
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 00:00:00,000");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 00:00:00.000");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01T00:00:00,000");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01T00:00:00.000");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 00:00:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01T00:00:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 00:00:00,000");
(%o1)                         28800
(%i2) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 00:00:00.000");
(%o2)                         28800
(%i3) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01T00:00:00,000");
(%o3)                         28800
(%i4) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01T00:00:00.000");
(%o4)                         28800
(%i5) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 00:00:00");
(%o5)                         28800
(%i6) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01T00:00:00");
(%o6)                         28800
(%i7) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01");
(%o7)                         28800
@end example

Midnight, January 1, 1900, GMT, in different indicated time zones.

@c ===beg===
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 19:00:00+19:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 07:00:00+07:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 01:00:00+01:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1900-01-01Z");
@c parse_timedate ("1899-12-31 21:00:00-03:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1899-12-31 13:00:00-11:00");
@c parse_timedate ("1899-12-31 08:00:00-16:00");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 19:00:00+19:00");
(%o1)                           0
(%i2) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 07:00:00+07:00");
(%o2)                           0
(%i3) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01 01:00:00+01:00");
(%o3)                           0
(%i4) parse_timedate ("1900-01-01Z");
(%o4)                           0
(%i5) parse_timedate ("1899-12-31 21:00:00-03:00");
(%o5)                           0
(%i6) parse_timedate ("1899-12-31 13:00:00-11:00");
(%o6)                           0
(%i7) parse_timedate ("1899-12-31 08:00:00-16:00");
(%o7)                           0
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{encode_time}
@deffn {Function} encode_time @
@fname{encode_time} (@var{year}, @var{month}, @var{day}, @var{hours}, @var{minutes}, @var{seconds}, @var{tz_offset}) @
@fname{encode_time} (@var{year}, @var{month}, @var{day}, @var{hours}, @var{minutes}, @var{seconds})

Given a time and date specified by
@var{year}, @var{month}, @var{day}, @var{hours}, @var{minutes}, and @var{seconds},
@code{encode_time} returns the number of seconds (possibly including a fractional part)
since midnight, January 1, 1900 GMT.

@var{year} must be an integer greater than or equal to 1899.
However, 1899 is allowed only if the resulting encoded time is greater than or equal to 0.

@var{month} must be an integer from 1 to 12, inclusive.

@var{day} must be an integer from 1 to @var{n}, inclusive,
where @var{n} is the number of days in the month specified by @var{month}.

@var{hours} must be an integer from 0 to 23, inclusive.

@var{minutes} must be an integer from 0 to 59, inclusive.

@var{seconds} must be an integer, rational, or float
greater than or equal to 0 and less than 60.
When @var{seconds} is not an integer,
@code{encode_time} returns a rational,
such that the fractional part of the return value is equal to the fractional part of @var{seconds}.
Otherwise, @var{seconds} is an integer, and the return value is likewise an integer.

@var{tz_offset} measures the offset of the time zone, in hours,
east (positive) or west (negative) of GMT.
@var{tz_offset} must be an integer, rational, or float between -24 and 24, inclusive.
If @var{tz_offset} is not a multiple of 1/3600, 
it is rounded to the nearest multiple of 1/3600.

If @var{tz_offset} is not present, the offset of the local time zone is assumed.

See also @mrefdot{decode_time}

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c encode_time (1900, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0);
@c encode_time (1970, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0);
@c encode_time (1970, 1, 1, 8, 30, 0, 8.5);
@c encode_time (1969, 12, 31, 16, 0, 0, -8);
@c encode_time (1969, 12, 31, 16, 0, 1/1000, -8);
@c % - 2208988800;
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) encode_time (1900, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0);
(%o1)                           0
(%i2) encode_time (1970, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0);
(%o2)                      2208988800
(%i3) encode_time (1970, 1, 1, 8, 30, 0, 8.5);
(%o3)                      2208988800
(%i4) encode_time (1969, 12, 31, 16, 0, 0, -8);
(%o4)                      2208988800
(%i5) encode_time (1969, 12, 31, 16, 0, 1/1000, -8);
                          2208988800001
(%o5)                     -------------
                              1000
(%i6) % - 2208988800;
                               1
(%o6)                         ----
                              1000
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{decode_time}
@deffn {Function} decode_time @
@fname{decode_time} (@var{T}, @var{tz_offset}) @
@fname{decode_time} (@var{T})

Given the number of seconds (possibly including a fractional part)
since midnight, January 1, 1900 GMT,
returns the date and time as represented by a list comprising
the year, month, day of the month, hours, minutes, seconds, and time zone offset.

@var{tz_offset} measures the offset of the time zone, in hours,
east (positive) or west (negative) of GMT.
@var{tz_offset} must be an integer, rational, or float between -24 and 24, inclusive.
If @var{tz_offset} is not a multiple of 1/3600, 
it is rounded to the nearest multiple of 1/3600.

If @var{tz_offset} is not present, the offset of the local time zone is assumed.

See also @mrefdot{encode_time}

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c decode_time (0, 0);
@c decode_time (0);
@c decode_time (2208988800, 9.25);
@c decode_time (2208988800);
@c decode_time (2208988800 + 1729/1000, -6);
@c decode_time (2208988800 + 1729/1000);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) decode_time (0, 0);
(%o1)               [1900, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0]
(%i2) decode_time (0);
(%o2)             [1899, 12, 31, 16, 0, 0, - 8]
(%i3) decode_time (2208988800, 9.25);
                                          37
(%o3)              [1970, 1, 1, 9, 15, 0, --]
                                          4
(%i4) decode_time (2208988800);
(%o4)             [1969, 12, 31, 16, 0, 0, - 8]
(%i5) decode_time (2208988800 + 1729/1000, -6);
                                      1729
(%o5)           [1969, 12, 31, 18, 0, ----, - 6]
                                      1000
(%i6) decode_time (2208988800 + 1729/1000);
                                      1729
(%o6)           [1969, 12, 31, 16, 0, ----, - 8]
                                      1000
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{absolute_real_time}
@deffn {Function} absolute_real_time ()

Returns the number of seconds since midnight, January 1, 1900 GMT.
The return value is an integer.

See also @mref{elapsed_real_time} and @mrefdot{elapsed_run_time}

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c absolute_real_time ();
@c 1900 + absolute_real_time () / (365.25 * 24 * 3600);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) absolute_real_time ();
(%o1)                      3385045277
(%i2) 1900 + absolute_real_time () / (365.25 * 24 * 3600);
(%o2)                   2007.265612087104
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{elapsed_real_time}
@deffn {Function} elapsed_real_time ()

Returns the number of seconds (including fractions of a second)
since Maxima was most recently started or restarted.
The return value is a floating-point number.

See also @mref{absolute_real_time} and @mrefdot{elapsed_run_time}

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c elapsed_real_time ();
@c expand ((a + b)^500)$
@c elapsed_real_time ();
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) elapsed_real_time ();
(%o1)                       2.559324
(%i2) expand ((a + b)^500)$
(%i3) elapsed_real_time ();
(%o3)                       7.552087
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{elapsed_run_time}
@deffn {Function} elapsed_run_time ()

Returns an estimate of the number of seconds (including fractions of a second)
which Maxima has spent in computations since Maxima was most recently started
or restarted.  The return value is a floating-point number.

See also @mref{absolute_real_time} and @mrefdot{elapsed_real_time}

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c elapsed_run_time ();
@c expand ((a + b)^500)$
@c elapsed_run_time ();
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) elapsed_run_time ();
(%o1)                         0.04
(%i2) expand ((a + b)^500)$
(%i3) elapsed_run_time ();
(%o3)                         1.26
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Time and date functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

