\input texinfo

@c NOTE: This template-standalone.texi shows how to create a texinfo file
@c that yields a stand-alone MYPACKAGE.info file.
@c See template.texi for a texinfo file which is to be part of maxima.info.

@c NOTE: The content of this file was determined by tedious trial and error.
@c My advice is to keep all elements of this template, from \input to @bye,
@c otherwise you'll experience cryptic error messages, hair loss, etc.

@c makeinfo MYPACKAGE.texi         to make .info
@c texi2html MYPACKAGE.texi        to make .html
@c texi2pdf MYPACKAGE.texi         to make .pdf

@setfilename MYPACKAGE.info
@settitle Package MYPACKAGE

@ifinfo
@macro var {expr}
<\expr\>
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@dircategory Mathematics/Maxima
@direntry
* Package MYPACKAGE: (maxima)Maxima share package MYPACKAGE for foo bar baz quux.
@end direntry

@node Top, Introduction to package MYPACKAGE, (dir), (dir)
@top
@menu
* Introduction to package MYPACKAGE::
* Definitions for package MYPACKAGE::
* Function and variable index::
@end menu
@chapter Package MYPACKAGE

@node Introduction to package MYPACKAGE, Definitions for package MYPACKAGE, Top, Top
@section Introduction to package MYPACKAGE

Package @code{MYPACKAGE} is yadda yadda yadda, foo bar baz quux mumble blurf.

@node Definitions for package MYPACKAGE, Function and variable index, Introduction to package MYPACKAGE, Top
@section Definitions for package MYPACKAGE

@deffn {Function} transmogrify (@var{foo}, @var{bar})

Returns the generalized transmogrificatin of @var{foo} and @var{bar}.
See also @code{frotz}.

@end deffn

@defvr {Variable} frotz
Default value: @code{true}

When @code{frotz} is @code{true},
@code{transmogrify} computes the transmogrification by Smith's algorithm.
Otherwise, the transmogrification is computed by Jones' algorithm.

@end defvr

@node Function and variable index,  , Definitions for package MYPACKAGE, Top
@appendix Function and variable index
@printindex fn
@printindex vr

@bye
