\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename  maxima.info
@synindex vr fn
@settitle Maxima Manual
@c %**end of header
@setchapternewpage odd
@ifinfo
This is a Texinfo Maxima Manual

Copyright 1994,2001 William F. Schelter

@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Maxima: (maxima).     A computer algebra system.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo 
@macro var {expr}
<\expr\>
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@comment The title is printed in a large font.
@center @titlefont{Maxima Manual}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Maxima is a computer algebra system, implemented in Lisp.

@end titlepage

@summarycontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction to Maxima, (dir), (dir)
@top

Maxima is a computer algebra system, implemented in Lisp.

@end ifnottex

@c includes

@menu
Maxima infrastructure

* Introduction to Maxima::      Sample Maxima sessions.
* Bug Detection and Reporting:: Finding and reporting bugs in Maxima.
* Help::                        Asking for help from within a Maxima session.
* Command Line::                Maxima command line syntax.
* Operators::                   Operators used in Maxima expressions.
* Expressions::                 Expressions in Maxima.
* Simplification::              Simplifying expressions.
* Plotting::                    2D and 3D graphical output.
* Input and Output::            File input and output.
* Floating Point::              Low level numerical routines.
* Contexts::                    Sets of assumed facts.

Support for specific areas of mathematics

* Polynomials::                 Standard forms for polynomials, and
                                functions operating on them.
* Constants::                   Numerical constants.
* Logarithms::                  Manipulation of expressions involving
                                logarithms.
* Trigonometric::               Manipulating expressions with trig and
                                inverse trig functions.
* Special Functions::           Special functions
* Elliptic Functions::          Elliptic Functions and Integrals
* Limits::                      Limits of expressions.
* Differentiation::             Differential calculus.
* Integration::                 Integral calculus.
* Equations::                   Defining and solving equations.
* Differential Equations::      Defining and solving differential equations.
* Numerical::                   Numerical integration, Fourier
                                transforms, etc.
* Arrays::                      Creating and working with arrays.
* Matrices and Linear Algebra:: Matrix operations.
* Affine::                      
* itensor::                     Indicial Tensor Manipulation.
* ctensor::                     Component Tensor Manipulation.
* atensor::                     Algebraic Tensor Manipulation.
* Series::                      Taylor and power series.
* Number Theory::               Number theory.
* Symmetries::                  
* Groups::                      Abstract algebra.

Advanced facilities and programming

* Runtime Environment::         Customization of the Maxima environment.
* Miscellaneous Options::       Options with a global effect on Maxima.
* Rules and Patterns::          User defined pattern matching and
                                simplification rules.
* Lists::                       Manipulation of lists.
* Sets::                        Manipulation of sets.
* Function Definition::         Defining functions.
* Program Flow::                Defining Maxima programs.
* Debugging::                   Debugging Maxima programs.

Additional packages

* augmented_lagrangian::        augmented_lagrangian package.
* bode::                        Bode gain and phase plots.
* descriptive::                 Descriptive statistics.
* diag::                        Jordan matrices.
* distrib::                     Probability distributions.
* dynamics::                    Graphics for dynamical systems and fractals.
* eval_string::                 Maxima expressions as strings.
* f90::                         Maxima to fortran translator.
* ggf::                         Generating function of sequences.
* impdiff::                     Implicit derivatives.
* interpol::                    Interpolation package.
* lindstedt::                   Lindstedt package.
* linearalgebra::               Functions for linear algebra.
* lsquares::                    Least squares.
* makeOrders::                  Polynomial utility.
* mnewton::                     Newton's method.
* numericalio::                 Reading and writing files.
* opsubst::                     Substitutions utility.
* orthopoly::                   Orthogonal polynomials.
* plotdf::                      Direction fields plots.
* simplex::                     Linear programming.
* simplification::              Simplification rules and functions.
* solve_rec::                   Linear recurrences.
* stirling::                    Stirling formula.
* stringproc::                  String processing.
* unit::                        Units and dimensions package.
* zeilberger::                  Functions for hypergeometric summation.


Index

* Function and Variable Index:: Index.

@comment @detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Introduction to Maxima::

Help

* Lisp and Maxima::            
* Garbage Collection::          
* Documentation::               
* Definitions for Help::        

Command Line

* Introduction to Command Line::  
* Definitions for Command Line::  

Operators

* nary::                        
* nofix::                       
* operator::                    
* postfix::                     
* prefix::                      
* Definitions for Operators::   

Expressions

* Introduction to Expressions::  
* Assignment::                  
* Complex::                     
* Inequality::                  
* Syntax::                      
* Definitions for Expressions::  

Simplification

* Definitions for Simplification::  

Plotting

* Definitions for Plotting::    

Input and Output

* Comments::
* Files::                       
* Definitions for Input and Output::  

Floating Point

* Definitions for Floating Point::  

Contexts

* Definitions for Contexts::    

Polynomials

* Introduction to Polynomials::  
* Definitions for Polynomials::  

Constants

* Definitions for Constants::   

Logarithms

* Definitions for Logarithms::  

Trigonometric

* Introduction to Trigonometric::  
* Definitions for Trigonometric::  

Special Functions

* Introduction to Special Functions::  
* specint::                     
* Definitions for Special Functions::  

Elliptic Functions

* Introduction to Elliptic Functions and Integrals::
* Definitions for Elliptic Functions::
* Definitions for Elliptic Integrals::

Limits

* Definitions for Limits::      

Differentiation

* Definitions for Differentiation::  

Integration

* Introduction to Integration::  
* Definitions for Integration::  

Equations

* Definitions for Equations::   

Differential Equations

* Definitions for Differential Equations::  

Numerical

* Introduction to Numerical::   
* Fourier packages::                     
* Definitions for Numerical::   
* Definitions for Fourier Series::

Arrays

* Definitions for Arrays::  

Matrices and Linear Algebra

* Introduction to Matrices and Linear Algebra::  
* Dot::                         
* Vectors::                     
* eigen::
* Definitions for Matrices and Linear Algebra::  

Affine

* Definitions for Affine::      

itensor

* Introduction to itensor::      
* Definitions for itensor::      

ctensor

* Introduction to ctensor::     
* Definitions for ctensor::     

atensor

* Introduction to atensor::     
* Definitions for atensor::     

Series

* Introduction to Series::      
* Definitions for Series::      

Number Theory

* Definitions for Number Theory::  

Symmetries

* Definitions for Symmetries::  

Groups

* Definitions for Groups::      

Runtime Environment

* Introduction for Runtime Environment::  
* Interrupts::                  
* Definitions for Runtime Environment::  

Miscellaneous Options

* Introduction to Miscellaneous Options::  
* Share::                       
* Definitions for Miscellaneous Options::  

Rules and Patterns

* Introduction to Rules and Patterns::  
* Definitions for Rules and Patterns::  

Lists

* Introduction to Lists::       
* Definitions for Lists::       

Sets

* Introduction to Sets::       
* Definitions for Sets::       

Function Definition

* Introduction to Function Definition::  
* Function::                    
* Macros::                      
* Definitions for Function Definition::  

Program Flow

* Introduction to Program Flow::  
* Definitions for Program Flow::  

Debugging

* Definitions for Debugging::   


augmented_lagrangian

* Definitions for augmented_lagrangian::

bode

* Definitions for bode::

descriptive

* Introduction to descriptive::
* Definitions for data manipulation::
* Definitions for descriptive statistics::
* Definitions for specific multivariate descriptive statistics::
* Definitions for statistical graphs::

diag

* Definitions for diag::

distrib

* Introduction to distrib::
* Definitions for continuous distributions::
* Definitions for discrete distributions::

dynamics

* Introduction to dynamics::
* Definitions for dynamics::

eval_string

* Definitions for eval_string::

f90

* Definitions for f90::

ggf

* Definitions for ggf::

impdiff

* Definitions for impdiff::

interpol

* Introduction to interpol::
* Definitions for interpol::

lindstedt

* Definitions for lindstedt::

linearalgebra

* Introduction to linearalgebra::
* Definitions for linearalgebra::

lsquares

* Definitions for lsquares::

makeOrders

* Definitions for makeOrders::

mnewton

* Definitions for mnewton::

numericalio

* Introduction to numericalio::
* Definitions for numericalio::

opsubst

* Definitions for opsubst::

orthopoly

* Introduction to orthogonal polynomials::
* Definitions for orthogonal polynomials::

plotdf

* Introduction to plotdf::
* Definitions for plotdf::

simplex

* Introduction to simplex::
* Definitions for simplex::

simplification

* Introduction to simplification::
* Definitions for simplification::

solve_rec

* Introduction to solve_rec::
* Definitions for solve_rec::

stirling

* Definitions for stirling::

stringproc

* Introduction to string processing::
* Definitions for input and output::
* Definitions for characters::
* Definitions for strings::

unit

* Introduction to Units::       
* Definitions for Units::

zeilberger

* Introduction to zeilberger::
* Definitions for zeilberger::

@comment @end detailmenu
@end menu

@c  Put the @node lines here, rather than in the @included files,
@c  so emacs can automatically update them with C-c C-u C-e.
@c  nota bene: C-c C-u C-a and texinfo-multiple-files-update will delete
@c  the detailed node listing!

@node Introduction to Maxima, Bug Detection and Reporting, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction to Maxima
@include Introduction.texi

@node Bug Detection and Reporting, Help, Introduction to Maxima, Top
@chapter Bug Detection and Reporting
@include Bugs.texi

@node Help, Command Line, Bug Detection and Reporting, Top
@chapter Help
@include Help.texi

@node Command Line, Operators, Help, Top
@chapter Command Line
@include Command.texi

@node Operators, Expressions, Command Line, Top
@chapter Operators
@include Operators.texi

@node Expressions, Simplification, Operators, Top
@chapter Expressions
@include Expressions.texi

@node Simplification, Plotting, Expressions, Top
@chapter Simplification
@include Simplification.texi

@node Plotting, Input and Output, Simplification, Top
@chapter Plotting
@include Plotting.texi

@node Input and Output, Floating Point, Plotting, Top
@chapter Input and Output
@include Input.texi

@node Floating Point, Contexts, Input and Output, Top
@chapter Floating Point
@include Floating.texi

@node Contexts, Polynomials, Floating Point, Top
@chapter Contexts
@include Contexts.texi

@node Polynomials, Constants, Contexts, Top
@chapter Polynomials
@include Polynomials.texi

@node Constants, Logarithms, Polynomials, Top
@chapter Constants
@include Constants.texi

@node Logarithms, Trigonometric, Constants, Top
@chapter Logarithms
@include Logarithms.texi

@node Trigonometric, Special Functions, Logarithms, Top
@chapter Trigonometric
@include Trigonometric.texi

@node Special Functions, Elliptic Functions, Trigonometric, Top
@chapter Special Functions
@include Special.texi

@node Elliptic Functions, Limits, Special Functions, Top
@chapter Elliptic Functions
@include Elliptic.texi

@node Limits, Differentiation, Elliptic Functions, Top
@chapter Limits
@include Limits.texi

@node Differentiation, Integration, Limits, Top
@chapter Differentiation
@include Differentiation.texi

@node Integration, Equations, Differentiation, Top
@chapter Integration
@include Integration.texi

@node Equations, Differential Equations, Integration, Top
@chapter Equations
@include Equations.texi

@node Differential Equations, Numerical, Equations, Top
@chapter Differential Equations
@include Differential.texi

@c @include NonCommutative.texi

@node Numerical, Arrays, Differential Equations, Top
@chapter Numerical
@include Numerical.texi

@node Arrays, Matrices and Linear Algebra, Numerical, Top
@chapter Arrays
@include Arrays.texi

@node Matrices and Linear Algebra, Affine, Arrays, Top
@chapter Matrices and Linear Algebra
@include Matrices.texi

@node Affine, itensor, Matrices and Linear Algebra, Top
@chapter Affine
@include Affine.texi

@node itensor, ctensor, Affine, Top
@chapter itensor
@include Itensor.texi

@node ctensor, atensor, itensor, Top
@chapter ctensor
@include Ctensor.texi

@node atensor, Series, ctensor, Top
@chapter atensor
@include Atensor.texi

@node Series, Number Theory, atensor, Top
@chapter Series
@include Series.texi

@node Number Theory, Symmetries, Series, Top
@chapter Number Theory
@include Number.texi

@node Symmetries, Groups, Number Theory, Top
@chapter Symmetries
@include Symmetries.texi

@node Groups, Runtime Environment, Symmetries, Top
@chapter Groups
@include Groups.texi

@node Runtime Environment, Miscellaneous Options, Groups, Top
@chapter Runtime Environment
@include Runtime.texi

@node Miscellaneous Options, Rules and Patterns, Runtime Environment, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous Options
@include Miscellaneous.texi

@node Rules and Patterns, Lists, Miscellaneous Options, Top
@chapter Rules and Patterns
@include Rules.texi

@node Lists, Sets, Rules and Patterns, Top
@chapter Lists
@include Lists.texi

@node Sets, Function Definition, Lists, Top
@chapter Sets
@include nset.texi

@node Function Definition, Program Flow, Sets, Top
@chapter Function Definition
@include Function.texi

@node Program Flow, Debugging, Function Definition, Top
@chapter Program Flow
@include Program.texi

@node Debugging, augmented_lagrangian, Program Flow, Top
@chapter Debugging
@include Debugging.texi

@node augmented_lagrangian, bode, Debugging, Top
@chapter augmented_lagrangian
@include augmented_lagrangian.texi

@node bode, descriptive, augmented_lagrangian, Top
@chapter bode
@include bode.texi

@node descriptive, diag, bode, Top
@chapter descriptive
@include descriptive.texi

@node diag, distrib, descriptive, Top
@chapter diag
@include diag.texi

@node distrib, dynamics, diag, Top
@chapter distrib
@include distrib.texi

@node dynamics, eval_string, distrib, Top
@chapter dynamics
@include dynamics.texi

@node eval_string, f90, dynamics, Top
@chapter eval_string
@include eval_string.texi

@node f90, ggf, eval_string, Top
@chapter f90
@include f90.texi

@node ggf, impdiff, f90, Top
@chapter ggf
@include ggf.texi

@node impdiff, interpol, ggf, Top
@chapter impdiff
@include impdiff.texi

@node interpol, lindstedt, impdiff, Top
@chapter interpol
@include interpol.texi

@node lindstedt, linearalgebra, interpol, Top
@chapter lindstedt
@include lindstedt.texi

@node linearalgebra, lsquares, lindstedt, Top
@chapter linearalgebra
@include linearalgebra.texi

@node lsquares, makeOrders, linearalgebra, Top
@chapter lsquares
@include lsquares.texi

@node makeOrders, mnewton, lsquares, Top
@chapter makeOrders
@include makeOrders.texi

@node mnewton, numericalio, makeOrders, Top
@chapter mnewton
@include mnewton.texi

@node numericalio, opsubst, mnewton, Top
@chapter numericalio
@include numericalio.texi

@node opsubst, orthopoly, numericalio, Top
@chapter opsubst
@include opsubst.texi

@node orthopoly, plotdf, opsubst, Top
@chapter orthopoly
@include orthopoly.texi

@node plotdf, simplex, orthopoly, Top
@chapter plotdf
@include plotdf.texi

@node simplex, simplification, plotdf, Top
@chapter simplex
@include simplex.texi

@node simplification, solve_rec, simplex, Top
@chapter simplification
@include simplifications.texi

@node solve_rec, stirling, simplification, Top
@chapter solve_rec
@include solve_rec.texi

@node stirling, stringproc, solve_rec, Top
@chapter stirling
@include stirling.texi

@node stringproc, unit, stirling, Top
@chapter stringproc
@include stringproc.texi

@node unit, zeilberger, stringproc, Top
@chapter unit
@include unit.texi

@node zeilberger, Function and Variable Index, unit, Top
@chapter zeilberger
@include zeilberger.texi

@node Function and Variable Index,  , zeilberger, Top
@chapter Indices
@include Indices.texi

@c end includes

@bye
